This copy is for personal use only. To order printed copies, contact reprints@rsna.org

1339

Tumors and Tumorlike Conditions
of the Anal Canal and Perianal
Region: MR Imaging Findings1

Venkateswar R. Surabhi, MD
Christine O. Menias, MD
Ahmed M. Amer, MBBS
Mohamed Elshikh, MBBS
Venkata S. Katabathina, MD
Amy K. Hara, MD
William C. Baughman, MD
Ania Kielar, MD
Khaled M. Elsayes, MD
Cary L. Siegel, MD

Abbreviations:  FDG  =  fluorine  18  fluorode-
oxyglucose,  HIV  =  human  immunodeficiency
virus,  HPV  =  human  papillomavirus,  SCC  =
squamous cell carcinoma

RadioGraphics 2016; 36:1339–1353

Published online 10.1148/rg.2016150209

Content Codes:

1From the Department of Radiology, University
of Texas  Health  Science  Center,  6431  Fannin
St,  MSB  2.130,  Houston, TX  77030  (V.R.S.);
Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Scotts-
dale,  Ariz  (C.O.M.,  A.K.H.);  Department  of
Radiology,  University  of  Texas  MD  Anderson
Cancer  Center,  Houston,  Tex  (A.M.A.,  M.E.,
K.M.E.);  Department  of  Radiology,  University
of Texas  Health  Science  Center,  San  Antonio,
Tex  (V.S.K.);  Department  of  Radiology,  Me-
troHealth  Medical  Center,  Cleveland,  Ohio
(W.C.B.);  Department  of  Radiology,  University
of  Ottawa,  Ottawa,  Ontario,  Canada  (A.K.);
and  Mallinckrodt  Institute  of  Radiology, Wash-
ington University School of Medicine, St Louis,
Mo (C.L.S.). Recipient of a Certificate of Merit
award  for  an  education  exhibit  at  the  2014
RSNA Annual Meeting. Received June 29, 2015;
revision requested October 16 and received No-
vember 13; accepted January 12, 2016. For this
journal-based SA-CME activity, the authors, ed-
itor, and reviewers have disclosed no relevant re-
lationships. Address correspondence to V.R.S.
(e-mail: venkateswar.r.surabhi@uth.tmc.edu).

©RSNA, 2016

SA-CME LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After completing this journal-based SA-CME
activity, participants will be able to:

 ■ Describe the anal canal anatomy and
MR imaging techniques for the evaluation
of the anal canal and perianal region.

 ■ Explain the epidemiology, classification,
and pathogenesis of malignancies involv-
ing the anal canal and perianal region.

 ■ Describe the cross-sectional imaging
findings and the role of imaging in the
diagnosis and surveillance of anal canal
and perianal malignancies.

See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

Tumors and tumorlike conditions of the anus and perianal region
originate from the anal canal and anal margin or result from direct
extension of tumors from adjacent organs. The anatomy of the
anal canal is complex, and its different histologic characteristics
can lead to diverse pathologic conditions. The anal canal extends
from the anorectal junction to the anal verge. The World Health
Organization classification of anal canal tumors includes (a) anal
intraepithelial neoplasia, the precursor of squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC), and (b) invasive tumors. Invasive tumors are further clas-
sified on the basis of cell type as epithelial tumors (SCC, adeno-
carcinoma, mucinous adenocarcinoma, small cell carcinoma, and
undifferentiated carcinoma), nonepithelial tumors, carcinoid tu-
mors, melanoma, and secondary tumors (direct spread from rectal,
cervical, or prostate carcinoma). The anal margin, or perianal skin,
lies outside the anal verge and encompasses a radius of 5 cm from
the anal verge. Tumors in the anal margin are classified according
to the World Health Organization classification of skin tumors. Anal
margin tumors include SCC, anal intraepithelial neoplasia, also
known as Bowen disease, adenocarcinoma and its precursor Paget
disease, basal cell carcinoma, and verrucous carcinoma (Buschke-
Löwenstein tumor), which is a rare variant of SCC. Imaging plays
an important role in the evaluation, staging, and follow-up of
patients with anal and perianal tumors. However, because of the
overlap in imaging features among these diverse entities, a defini-
tive diagnosis is best established at histopathologic examination.
Nevertheless, familiarity with the pathogenesis, imaging features,
and treatment of these tumors can aid radiologic diagnosis and
guide appropriate patient treatment.

©RSNA, 2016 • radiographics.rsna.org

Introduction
Anal cancer accounts for 2% of all gastrointestinal malignancies and
only 0.4% of all new cancers diagnosed annually in the United States
(1). Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most common histologic
type of anal canal carcinoma. In the United States, the incidence of
SCC has increased, with 3500 new cases in 2001 and 3990 new cases
in 2005; for 2015, it was estimated that there would be 7270 new
cases of anal cancer and that an estimated 1010 people would die of
this disease (2). The number of new cases of anal cancer is 1.8 per
100 000 men and women per year according to 2008–2012 data (2).
Anal infection with human papillomavirus (HPV), in particular HPV
types 16 and 18, is the most important risk factor for the development
of anal SCC (3). HPV causes anal intraepithelial neoplasia, which
may progress to invasive cancer (4). In most cases, anal infection with

GASTROINTESTINAL IMAGING

1340  September-October 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

TEACHING POINTS
 ■ The muscles surrounding the anal canal control continence
and can be separated into the internal anal sphincter and the
external anal sphincter. The internal anal sphincter is the di-
rect extension of the inner circular smooth muscle layer of the
rectum and is innervated by both sympathetic and parasym-
pathetic nerves, allowing for a state of tonic contraction and
baseline  continence.  At  magnetic  resonance  (MR)  imaging,
the internal anal sphincter is typically slightly hyperintense on
T2-weighted MR images. The external anal sphincter is con-
tiguous with the levator ani and puborectalis muscles supe-
riorly, is innervated by branches of the pudendal nerve and
the perineal branch of the S4 nerve root, and contributes to
voluntary control of fecal continence. The external sphincter
is hypointense on T2-weighted MR images and can be eas-
ily recognized by its contrast in signal intensity from the sur-
rounding high-signal-intensity intersphincteric fat plane medi-
ally and the ischioanal and ischiorectal fat laterally.

 ■ The anal canal is tilted forward in the sagittal plane; thus, ap-
propriate angulation of the oblique axial images orthogonal
to the plane of the anal canal and of oblique coronal images
parallel to the plane of the anal canal is essential for the proper
assessment of the sphincter complex.

 ■ Staging for anal cancer is based on the size of the tumor rather
than the depth of invasion. Anal tumors smaller than 2 cm in
greatest dimension are classified as stage T1 lesions, tumors
measuring 2–5 cm as stage T2 lesions, and tumors larger than
5 cm as stage T3 lesions. Lesions that invade adjacent organs
such as the vagina, urethra, prostate, or bladder are classified
as stage T4 lesions. Rectal invasion is not considered stage T4
disease.

 ■ In patients with a positive response to chemoradiation ther-
apy, the size of the primary tumor decreases along with the
signal intensity on T2-weighted MR images. In patients with a
complete response, low signal intensity may be seen at the tu-
mor site on T2-weighted MR images, a finding that indicates
posttreatment fibrosis.

 ■ A useful distinguishing imaging feature of aggressive angio-
myxomas is the presence of a laminated appearance attrib-
uted to collagen fibrils in the background of a loose myxoid
stroma.

HPV is sexually transmitted; the risk of cancer
is greater in patients with a history of receptive
anal intercourse. Anal cancer rates are greater in
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)–positive
patients and in solid organ transplant recipients
in whom cell-mediated immunity is suppressed,
resulting in a poor immune response and the pro-
longed existence of HPV (3). In men who practice
anal intercourse, the incidence of anal cancer is
35 per 100 000, and those who are HIV positive
have twice the risk of those who are seronegative
(3,5). Other risk factors for anal SCC include the
coexistence of sexually transmitted diseases; a his-
tory of cervical, vulvar, or vaginal carcinoma; and
cigarette smoking (4). It is no longer believed that
chronic irritation of the perineum and the anal
canal is a predisposing factor for the development
of anal cancer (4). Less-frequent tumors include
those associated with Bowen disease and Paget

disease, basal cell carcinoma, melanoma, and
adenocarcinoma.

In this article, we review the World Health
Organization classification of anal carcinoma, the
imaging evaluation, and the treatment options for
neoplasms of the anal canal and perianal skin.

Anatomy
The anal region is composed of the anal canal,
the anal verge, and the anal margin. The anal ca-
nal extends from the dentate line, which is at the
inferior margin of the anal columns of Morgagni,
to the anal verge and measures approximately 4
cm. However, functionally accepted boundaries
extend from the anorectal junction above, which
is defined by the puborectalis muscle, to the anal
verge below (6). The anal verge is a band of squa-
mous epithelial tissue that lacks hair follicles and
extends from the intersphincteric groove onto the
perianal skin. The anal margin, or perianal skin,
is identified by keratinized epithelium contain-
ing hair follicles and encompasses a radius of 5
cm from the anal verge. The muscles surround-
ing the anal canal control continence and can
be separated into the internal anal sphincter (7)
and the external anal sphincter (8). The internal
anal sphincter (7) is the direct extension of the
inner circular smooth muscle layer of the rec-
tum and is innervated by both sympathetic and
parasympathetic nerves, allowing for a state of
tonic contraction and baseline continence (6). At
magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, the internal
anal sphincter is typically slightly hyperintense
on T2-weighted MR images (Figs 1, 2) (9). The
external anal sphincter (8) is contiguous with the
levator ani and puborectalis muscles superiorly,
is innervated by branches of the pudendal nerve
and the perineal branch of the S4 nerve root, and
contributes to voluntary control of fecal conti-
nence (10). The external sphincter is hypointense
on T2-weighted MR images and can be easily
recognized by its contrast in signal intensity from
the surrounding high-signal-intensity intersphinc-
teric fat plane medially and the ischioanal and
ischiorectal fat laterally (Figs 1, 2) (9,11,12).

The dentate line divides the upper two-thirds

and the lower one-third of the anal canal (Fig
2a) (3). The proximal one-third of the anal canal
is made up of colorectal mucosa, and the middle
third is made up of transitional zone mucosa;
nonkeratinized squamous epithelium is found
in the distal third. In addition, the anal canal
contains scattered melanocytes and endocrine
cells that can help explain the spectrum of
tumor types that may arise in the anal canal
(13). The dentate line also separates the patterns
of lymphatic drainage of anal tumors; tumors
above the dentate line drain into the perirectal

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 5

Surabhi et al  1341

Figure 1.  Anatomy of the anal canal in the axial plane. Drawing (a) and axial T2-weighted MR image (b)
of the anatomic structures of the anal canal at the level of the ischiorectal fossa (H) show the external
(black arrow) and internal (white arrow) anal sphincters. (Fig 1a reproduced, with permission, from Mayo
Foundation for Medical Education and Research.)

Figure 2.  Anatomy of the anal canal in the coronal plane. (a) Drawing shows the external
anal  sphincter  (solid  black  arrow),  internal  anal  sphincter  (white  arrow),  intersphincteric  fat
(dashed black arrow), and dentate line (arrowheads). (b) Coronal T2-weighted MR image of
the anal canal shows the intersphincteric fat (dashed black arrow), the external anal sphincter
(solid black arrow), which is contiguous with the puborectalis muscle, and the internal anal
sphincter (white arrow), which is the contiguous extension of the inner circular muscle layer of
the rectum. (Fig 2a reproduced, with permission, from Mayo Foundation for Medical Educa-
tion and Research.)

and internal iliac nodes, whereas tumors below
the dentate line and the anal margin drain into
the inguinal and femoral lymph nodes (14).

MR Imaging Technique
MR imaging performed with surface coils provides
excellent anatomic detail of the anal sphincters
and the anatomic boundaries of the pelvis. Endo-
anal coils provide superior anatomic resolution but
have a limited field of view and are poorly toler-
ated in symptomatic patients. High-resolution T2-
weighted MR images are the standard of reference
in the evaluation of pathologic conditions of the
anal canal (12). These images are ideally obtained

with 3-mm-thick sections by using a small field of
view. The anal canal is tilted forward in the sagittal
plane; thus, appropriate angulation of the oblique
axial images orthogonal to the plane of the anal
canal and of oblique coronal images parallel to the
plane of the anal canal is essential for the proper
assessment of the sphincter complex (15). The
protocol used at our institution for the evaluation
of anal disease includes oblique axial T1-weighted
fast spin-echo MR pulse sequences, oblique axial
and coronal T2-weighted fast spin-echo sequences,
fat-saturated T2-weighted sequences that use short
inversion time inversion recovery or spectrally
adiabatic inversion recovery, and oblique axial and

1342  September-October 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Table 1: MR Imaging Protocol for Evaluating the Anal Canal and Perianal Region

MR Imaging Sequence

TR/TE
(msec)

Section
Thickness (mm)

Section
Gap (mm)

No. of Signals
Acquired

Coronal T2-weighted single-shot fast spin-echo
imaging (to cover pelvis with a large FOV)
Axial, coronal, and sagittal (orthogonal to anal
canal) T2-weighted fast-recovery fast spin-
echo imaging

645/85

3000/100

Axial T2-weighted fast-recovery fast spin-echo

4500/105

fat-saturated imaging

Axial nonenhanced and contrast-enhanced T1-
weighted fat-saturated 3D volume gradient-
echo imaging

450/2.5

Axial diffusion-weighted imaging (b = 0, 400,

3000/100

and 800 sec/mm2)

6

3

3

3

6

7

0.3

0.3

0

0

0.5

4

4

2

6

Note.—FOV = field of view, 3D = three-dimensional, TR/TE = repetition time/echo time.

oblique coronal fat-saturated T1-weighted fast
spin-echo sequences with intravenous gadolinium-
based contrast material. The three-dimensional
isovoxel T2-weighted fast spin-echo sequence
provides source data for postprocessing with image
reformatting techniques to obtain reformatted im-
ages in any desired plane. Diffusion-weighted MR
imaging is routinely performed for the evaluation
of pathologic conditions of the anal canal (16).
Commonly used b values include 0, 400, and 800
sec/mm2, followed by reconstruction of an appar-
ent diffusion coefficient map (Table 1) (10,12).

Classification

Anal Canal Tumors
The current World Health Organization clas-
sification of tumors of the anal canal consists
of intraepithelial and invasive tumors (Table 2)
(4). Anal intraepithelial neoplasia is the precur-
sor to anal SCC. Invasive tumors are further
classified on the basis of cell type as primary
epithelial tumors (SCC, adenocarcinoma, mu-
cinous adenocarcinoma, small cell carcinoma,
and undifferentiated carcinoma), nonepithelial
tumors, carcinoid tumors, or melanoma. Second-
ary tumors (direct spread from rectal carcinoma,
cervical carcinoma, or prostate carcinoma) may
also involve the anal canal (3,4).

Anal Margin Tumors
Tumors in the anal margin are classified according
to the World Health Organization classification of
skin tumors (4). Anal margin tumors can also be
intraepithelial or invasive. Anal intraepithelial neo-
plasia, also known as Bowen disease, is a precursor
to SCC; and Paget disease is a precursor to adeno-
carcinoma (4). Invasive tumors include SCC, ad-

Table 2: World Health Organization Classifi-
cation of Anal Canal Tumors

Tumor Type

Intraepithelial neoplasia
  Anal intraepithelial neoplasia
Epithelial tumors
  SCC
  Adenocarcinoma
  Mucinous adenocarcinoma
  Small cell carcinoma
  Undifferentiated carcinoma
Nonepithelial tumors
  Leiomyoma
  Gastrointestinal stromal tumor
  Myofibroma
Carcinoid tumors

Melanoma

Secondary tumors
  Direct extension from adjacent organs: rectal
carcinoma, cervical carcinoma, and prostate
carcinoma

Source.—Reference 4.

enocarcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, and verrucous
carcinoma (Buschke-Löwenstein tumor), which is
a rare variant of SCC (4).

Types of Anal Canal Tumors

Anal Intraepithelial Neoplasia
Anal intraepithelial neoplasia is a precursor
lesion of anal SCC, and the incidence of anal in-
traepithelial neoplasia is increasing in immuno-

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 5

Surabhi et al  1343

Figure 3.  Anal SCC in a 63-year-old woman presenting with rectal bleeding. (a) Axial T2-
weighted MR image shows a 4-cm infiltrative mass (arrows), a finding suggestive of a stage
T2 tumor involving both the internal and external sphincters. (b) Axial gadolinium-enhanced
T1-weighted MR image shows intense enhancement of the mass (arrow).

suppressed patients and those with HIV infec-
tion or HPV infection (17). Anal intraepithelial
neoplasia is usually detected incidentally during
the workup for other regional complaints, such
as hemorrhoids (18). Anal intraepithelial neo-
plasia may appear as an eczematous, scaly, white
or pigmented lesion with or without fissures. In-
duration or ulceration is a sign of poor prognosis
and may indicate invasiveness. At histopatho-
logic examination, lesions show a loss of stratifi-
cation, dark nuclei, and nuclear pleomorphism.
Anal intraepithelial neoplasia can be low grade
or high grade, depending on the extent of the in-
volved anal epithelium, and is treated with local
ablation or surgery. HPV-based vaccines are also
beneficial in the management of anal intraepi-
thelial neoplasia in HPV-infected patients (19).

SCC of the Anal Canal
SCC is the most common type of anal canal
cancer, accounting for 80%–85% of all anal canal
cancers (20). SCC of the anal canal is increas-
ingly diagnosed in patients with HIV infection
and in immunosuppressed patients after trans-
plantation. HPV infection, cigarette smoking,
multiple sexual partners, and a history of previ-
ous or current intraepithelial neoplasia of the
cervix and vulva are associated with a greater
risk of developing anal canal SCC (20). Anal
infection with HPV, in particular HPV types 16
and 18, is the most important risk factor in the
development of anal SCC (3). SCC is associated
with HPV infection in 90% of patients (21). In a
large case-control study (22), investigators found
that cigarette smoking is a substantial risk factor
for the development of anal cancer. In addition,
men with a history of receptive anal intercourse
had a 33-fold greater relative risk for developing
anal cancer (22). Homosexual men with HIV
infection had double the risk for developing anal
cancer compared with HIV-negative homosexual

men (8,22). The presenting symptoms include
pain, ulceration, bleeding, discharge, and pruritus
(20). MR imaging provides information about
the tumor size, its local spread, and invasion of
adjacent organs. At imaging, anal cancer appears
as a lobulated intraluminal or infiltrative mass
with a tendency to spread circumferentially. At
MR imaging, anal carcinoma is isointense to hy-
perintense on T2-weighted MR images, is isoin-
tense to hypointense on T1-weighted MR images,
and enhances on contrast material–enhanced MR
images (Figs 3, 4) (12).

Staging for anal cancer is based on the size
of the tumor rather than the depth of invasion
(1). Anal tumors smaller than 2 cm in great-
est dimension are classified as stage T1 lesions,
tumors measuring 2–5 cm as stage T2 lesions,
and tumors larger than 5 cm as stage T3 lesions
(Figs 3, 4). Lesions that invade adjacent organs
such as the vagina, urethra, prostate, or bladder
are classified as stage T4 lesions. Rectal inva-
sion is not considered stage T4 disease (Table 3)
(23). Regional lymph nodes include the perirec-
tal, internal iliac, and inguinal nodes (1).

The current standard of care for treatment
of anal canal SCC is definitive chemoradiation
therapy (15). Chemoradiation therapy pre-
serves the sphincter complex and yields an 80%
survival rate at 5 years (15). Salvage surgery
with abdominoperineal resection is reserved for
only nonresponsive patients who have persis-
tent or recurrent tumors after chemoradiation
therapy (15). Assessment of the response to
treatment after chemoradiation therapy for
anal canal SCC is challenging, and recognition
of the changes to be expected on MR images
obtained after treatment is paramount to the
interpretation. MR imaging after chemoradia-
tion therapy often shows anal mucosal thicken-
ing and high T2 signal intensity that is due to
edema. In patients with a positive response to

1344  September-October 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 4.  Anal SCC in a 58-year-old woman with a long history of HIV infection who presented with rectal bleeding. Axial T2-
weighted (a), diffusion-weighted (b), and contrast-enhanced T1-weighted (c) MR images shows an ill-defined infiltrating anal mass
(arrows) with involvement of the internal and external anal sphincters and extension to the skin. This mass shows restricted diffusion
(arrow in b) and heterogeneous contrast enhancement (arrow in c).

Table 3: TNM Classification of Anal Canal Cancer

Descriptor

Primary tumor (T)
  Tx
  Tis
  T1
  T2
  T3
  T4
Regional lymph nodes (N)
  Nx
  N0
  N1
  N2
  N3
Distant metastasis (M)
  M0
  M1

Source.—Reference 23.

Definition

Primary tumor cannot be assessed
Carcinoma in situ
Tumor less than 2 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor between 2 and 5 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor more than 5 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor invading adjacent organs

Regional nodes cannot be assessed
No regional lymph node metastasis
Metastasis in the perirectal nodes
Metastasis in unilateral internal iliac and/or inguinal nodes
Metastasis in bilateral internal iliac or inguinal nodes

No distant metastasis
Distant metastasis

chemoradiation therapy, the size of the primary
tumor decreases along with the signal intensity
on T2-weighted MR images (15). In patients
with a complete response, low signal intensity
may be seen at the tumor site on T2-weighted
MR images, a finding that indicates posttreat-
ment fibrosis (12). Positron emission tomogra-
phy (PET) with fluorine 18 fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) integrated with computed tomography
(CT) (FDG PET/CT) plays an important role
in the evaluation of the treatment response in
patients after chemoradiation therapy (24). The
absence of residual metabolic activity at post-
treatment FDG PET/CT has been shown to
correlate with a longer progression-free survival
time (25).

Adenocarcinoma of the Anal Canal
Anal adenocarcinoma accounts for 10%–15%
of all anal canal cancers (26). Adenocarcinomas
are thought to originate from the anal glands and
then spread outward to involve the anal sphinc-
ter. Most anal adenocarcinomas are the result
of distal spread of rectal adenocarcinoma (27).
The clinical manifestation of adenocarcinoma is
similar to that of SCC of the anal canal. Treat-
ment strategies include total abdominoperineal
resection, radiation therapy followed by tumor
excision, and combined chemoradiation therapy
(26,28–30). On T2-weighted MR images, muci-
nous adenocarcinomas may show a characteristic
high signal intensity that might be less prominent
in nonmucinous adenocarcinomas (31).

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 5

Surabhi et al  1345

Figure 5.  SCC within an anorec-
tal fistula in a 68-year-old woman
with  a  history  of  Crohn  disease
and  a  long-standing  perianal  fis-
tula.  (a)  Coronal  T2-weighted
MR image shows a linear tract in
the  perianal  region  with  hetero-
geneous internal content (arrow).
(b)  Coronal  contrast-enhanced
T1-weighted MR image shows en-
hancement  of  not  only  the  tract
lining,  but  also  the  internal  con-
tent (arrow).

Figure 6.  Anal melanoma in a 58-year-old woman. (a) Axial T2-weighted MR image shows a heterogeneously
hyperintense  anal  mass  (arrow).  (b)  Axial  contrast-enhanced  T1-weighted  MR  image  shows  heterogeneous
enhancement of the mass (arrow).

Carcinoma within an Anorectal Fistula
Carcinoma arising from an anal fistula in patients
with Crohn disease is rare (32). Tumors arising
from nonhealing fistulas are either adenocarcino-
mas or SCCs (4). Carcinoma as a complication
in patients with Crohn disease who have anogeni-
tal disease typically arises from a long-standing
perianal fistula and manifests as advanced cancer
at diagnosis (32). Symptoms are usually nonspe-
cific, and the clinical or endoscopic examinations
are often limited because of the patient’s anal
pain and stricture. Cross-sectional imaging has a
low sensitivity in the detection of cancer compli-
cating anorectal fistulas (32); thus, it is important
for radiologists to have a high level of suspicion
for possible neoplastic changes when they review
the images of patients with perianal fistulas (32).
The presence of enhancing soft tissue within the
fistula should raise the possibility of malignant
transformation (Fig 5) (33).

and accounts for only 2% of all melanomas (34).
Anal melanoma usually manifests in elderly pa-
tients and has a slight female predominance (35).
There is often a delay in the clinical diagnosis of
anal melanomas because they are often misdiag-
nosed clinically as thrombosed hemorrhoids. The
imaging features of anal melanomas depend on
the melanin content and the presence or absence
of hemorrhage. Melanocytic melanomas demon-
strate both T1 and T2 shortening, whereas amela-
notic melanomas typically do not exhibit substan-
tial T1 or T2 shortening (Fig 6). The enhancement
pattern is usually homogeneous (36). The primary
approach to therapy is surgical, either with ab-
dominoperineal resection or wide local excision
(34). However, both of these procedures result in
the same long-term outcomes (34). Adjuvant che-
motherapy, immunotherapy, radiation therapy, or
a combination of these plays a role in the manage-
ment of advanced-stage anal melanomas (34).

Anal Melanoma
Anal melanoma is rare, with an incidence of
0.5%–2% of all anorectal malignant neoplasms,

Anal Lymphoma
The gastrointestinal tract is the most common
extranodal location of non-Hodgkin lymphomas,

1346  September-October 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 7.  Anal lymphoma in a 64-year-old woman. (a, b) Coronal T2-weighted (a) and gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted (b) MR
images show a lobulated T2-hyperintense mass (arrows in a) that demonstrates intense contrast enhancement (arrows in b). (c) Axial
FDG PET/CT image shows a mass with marked FDG activity (arrow). At histopathologic examination, the findings disclosed that this
mass was a marginal zone B-cell mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma.

with the stomach being the most commonly
involved site, followed by the small intestine and
the large intestine (37). Colorectal lymphoma
accounts for 9%–20% of all gastrointestinal
lymphomas but only 1% of colorectal malignant
neoplasms (38,39). The most common histo-
logic subtype is diffuse large B-cell non-Hodgkin
lymphoma (40). Primary anorectal lymphoma
is a rare entity, accounting for only 3% of all
gastrointestinal lymphomas (39); the incidence is
markedly higher in patients with AIDS. At imag-
ing, anal lymphoma appears as a solid mass with
focal and/or circumferential thickening of the
anal canal, typically without luminal obstruction.
At MR imaging, anal lymphoma lesions are isoin-
tense on nonenhanced T1-weighted MR images
and hyperintense on T2-weighted MR images
and show mild enhancement after administration
of contrast material (Fig 7). FDG PET can be a
useful diagnostic study because lymphomas show
avid uptake of FDG (41).

Lymphangioma
Lymphatic malformations are congenital
malformations of the lymphatic system, and
approximately 75% of the lesions are located
in the head and neck region. Intra-abdominal
lymphatic malformations are usually found
incidentally and account for nearly 5% of all
lymphatic malformations. Intra-abdominal
lymphatic malformations have been reported
in the mesentery, gastrointestinal tract, spleen,
liver, genitourinary system, and pancreas (42).
Lymphatic malformations may become symp-
tomatic if they become large enough to press
on surrounding structures. Rare complications
include intracystic hemorrhage, cyst rupture,
and infection (43,44). MR imaging is the mo-
dality of choice for diagnosis of lymphangiomas.
On MR images, a lymphatic malformation ap-
pears as a uni- or multicystic septate lesion with
internal signal intensity characteristics that vary

depending on the contents of the cyst. Lymphan-
giomas that contain serous fluid demonstrate
signal intensity characteristics similar to those of
simple fluid, with low signal intensity on T1-
weighted MR images and high signal intensity
on T2-weighted MR images (Fig 8); whereas
chylous and mixed-content lymphangiomas may
show signal dropout on T1-weighted gradient-
echo opposed-phase MR images compared with
T1-weighted gradient-echo in-phase MR images
and/or internal signal intensity suppression on
fat-saturated MR images (45). The cyst wall
and internal septa may show enhancement after
administration of contrast material (Fig 8).

Myofibroma
Myofibroma is a benign neoplasm composed
of myofibroblasts and can manifest as a solitary
form or as a generalized form known as myofi-
bromatosis (46). These tumors commonly occur
in the skin and subcutaneous tissues of the head
and neck. Solitary myofibromas of the gastroin-
testinal tract are rare, whereas as many as 40%
of patients with myofibromatosis have associated
visceral lesions (47,48). Solitary myofibromas
of visceral organs have been described at vari-
ous anatomic sites, including the pancreas, liver,
testis, ovary, gastrointestinal tract, and brain (46).
At MR imaging, myofibromas are isointense on
T1-weighted MR images, are hypointense on T2-
weighted MR images, and show intense enhance-
ment after administration of contrast material
(Fig 9). Myofibromas may also give the appear-
ance of a “target sign” on contrast-enhanced im-
ages, with peripheral enhancement and a central
hypointense area that reflects central tumor
necrosis (46,48,49).

Leiomyoma
Leiomyomas of the anal canal are rare and may
originate from the muscularis mucosae or muscu-
laris propria. Anorectal leiomyomas are more

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 5

Surabhi et al  1347

Figure 8.  Perianal lymphatic malformation in a 70-year-old man with a long-standing history
of  a  perineal  and  inguinoscrotal  mass.  (a)  Coronal  T2-weighted  MR  image  shows  a  multi-
loculate cystic mass (arrows) extending and involving the perianal region, the pelvis, and the
inguinoscrotal region. (b) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows peripheral
enhancement of the cyst walls (arrows) without any internal enhancement.

Figure 9.  Perianal myofibroma in a 32-year-old woman. (a) Axial T1-weighted MR image shows a well-circumscribed right perianal
mass (arrow) that is isointense to skeletal muscle. (b) Axial T2-weighted MR image shows a hypointense mass (arrow) and its origin
from the external sphincter of the anal canal. (c) Coronal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows intense enhancement of
the mass (arrow) and its relationship with the external sphincter of the anal canal.

common in male subjects, with a peak incidence
at the age of 60 years (50,51). At clinical pre-
sentation, patients with leiomyomas vary in their
symptoms, and patients may be asymptomatic
or may present with pelvic pain, a perineal mass,
bleeding, dysuria, or difficult defecation (50).
Smaller leiomyomas are confined to the anal ca-
nal, but larger leiomyomas may protrude through
the anal canal and extend into the perianal
region. Leiomyosarcoma is the malignant form
of smooth muscle tumors. Histologically, leio-
myosarcoma is differentiated from leiomyoma by
marked necrosis, a high number of mitoses, large
irregular nuclei, and deficient collagen stroma
(50,52). At MR imaging, leiomyoma appears as
a well-defined hypointense mass on T2-weighted
MR images and is isointense on T1-weighted MR
images (Fig 10) (53). Leiomyosarcomas are het-
erogeneous and isointense on T1-weighted MR
images, are hyperintense on T2-weighted MR

images, and demonstrate heterogeneous enhance-
ment on contrast-enhanced MR images (54).
Surgical excision is the treatment of choice.

Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors of the anal canal
are rare, accounting for 0.1%–0.4% of all gastro-
intestinal stromal tumors (55). Gastrointestinal
stromal tumors arise from the interstitial cells
of Cajal of the myenteric plexus, which con-
trol gastrointestinal tract motility. The biologic
behavior of anal gastrointestinal stromal tumors
is not clear, but most patients present with local
disease, and less than 20% of patients present
with or develop distant metastases (55). At MR
imaging, a gastrointestinal stromal tumor appears
as a large smoothly marginated extraluminal
mass arising from the anal canal. This tumor is
hypo- to isointense on T1-weighted MR images
and hyperintense on T2-weighted MR images.

1348  September-October 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 10.  Leiomyoma of the perianal region in a 35-year-old woman. (a) Axial T2-weighted MR im-
age shows a well-circumscribed mass (arrows) with characteristic T2 hypointensity in the right perianal
region. (b) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows heterogeneous enhancement of the
mass (arrows) and better depiction of the relationship with the anal canal.

Figure 11.  Gastrointestinal stromal tumor of the perianal region in a 52-year-old man. Coro-
nal T2-weighted (a) and contrast-enhanced T1-weighted (b) MR images show a T2-hyperin-
tense enhancing mural mass (arrows) in the left perianal region. At surgical resection, the mass
proved to be a gastrointestinal stromal tumor.

At contrast-enhanced MR imaging, the pattern
of enhancement is usually related to the tumor
size; the larger the tumor, the more heteroge-
neous the enhancement is, which correlates with
tumor necrosis (Fig 11) (56,57). The treatment
of choice is wide local excision or abdominoperi-
neal resection. The incidence of local recurrence
is lower after abdominoperineal resection (55).
However, the rate of distant metastasis and the
survival rate after abdominoperineal resection are
not significantly different from those after wide
local excision (55). Adjuvant therapy or salvage
therapy with imatinib mesylate, a tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, has shown promising results in the
treatment of patients with gastrointestinal stromal
tumors (55).

Aggressive Angiomyxoma
Aggressive angiomyxomas are rare mesenchy-
mal tumors that were first described in 1983 by

Steeper and Rosai (58). Aggressive angiomyxo-
mas principally manifest in women of reproduc-
tive age, with a peak incidence in the 4th to 5th
decades of life (59). Aggressive angiomyxomas
usually involve the deep soft tissues of the vul-
vovaginal region, perianal region, and perineum
of women and the inguinoscrotal region of men
(59). Aggressive angiomyxomas tend to spread
in multiple compartments without invading
adjacent organs. Most aggressive angiomyxo-
mas manifest as either a painless mass or a mass
causing local pressure. A useful distinguishing
imaging feature of aggressive angiomyxomas is
the presence of a laminated appearance attrib-
uted to collagen fibrils in the background of a
loose myxoid stroma (59) (Fig 12). The en-
hancement patterns of aggressive angiomyxomas
vary. The laminated morphologic appearance
can also be seen on contrast-enhanced CT and
MR images (59).

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 5

Surabhi et al  1349

Figure 12.  Aggressive angiomyxoma of the perianal region in a 35-year-old woman. (a) Coronal
T2-weighted  MR  image  shows  a  well-circumscribed  hyperintense  mass  in  the  left  perianal  region,
which crosses the urogenital diaphragm and extends into the left perirectal region and shows the
characteristic laminated appearance (arrows). (b) Axial gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MR im-
age shows diffuse enhancement of this mass (arrows). At surgical resection, this mass proved to be
an aggressive angiomyxoma.

Figure 13.  Paget disease of the anal margin in a 72-year-old woman. (a) Photograph of the anal margin shows an erythema-
tous, eczematous, nodular plaquelike lesion (arrow) in the right perianal region. (b, c) Axial T2-weighted (b) and gadolinium-
enhanced T1-weighted (c) MR images show an infiltrative hypointense mass lesion (arrows) involving the right anal margin; the
mass demonstrates heterogeneous enhancement. (Fig 13a courtesy of Bashar Safar, MD, Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Md.)

Types of Anal
Margin (Perianal) Tumors

Paget Disease
(Intraepithelial Adenocarcinoma)
Perianal Paget disease is an intraepithelial
adenocarcinoma and can be associated with
underlying colorectal adenocarcinoma and anal
carcinoma in 38%–69% of patients (60). Peri-
anal Paget disease is associated with nonspecific
symptoms such as perianal pain, bleeding, and
itching; and the nonspecific symptoms fre-
quently delay the diagnosis. Wide local excision
is the treatment of choice, and abdominoperi-
neal resection is considered for invasive disease.
Invasive disease can metastasize to distant sites
(61). MR imaging is useful for evaluating the
extent and the depth of invasion (Fig 13). FDG

PET can be a useful diagnostic study because
Paget disease may demonstrate FDG avidity at
PET (62).

Bowen Disease (Intraepithelial SCC)
Perianal Bowen disease is considered a rare
slow-growing premalignant lesion and is esti-
mated to progress to invasive SCC in 2%–6%
of cases (63). Bowen disease is associated with
infection with HPV types 16 and 18. Common
presenting symptoms include itching, burning,
and bleeding. Wide local excision is the treat-
ment of choice (63).

Verrucous Carcinoma
Verrucous carcinoma, also known as giant
condyloma acuminatum or Buschke-Löwenstein
tumor, is a large locally aggressive tumor with a

1350  September-October 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 14.  Verrucous carcinoma of the anal margin in a 44-year-old man with HIV infection and HPV
infection.  (a)  Photograph  of  the  perineum  shows  a  large  cauliflower-like  anal  mass  (arrow).  (b)  Axial
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows extensive nodular thickening and enhancement of the
perianal skin (arrows) that also extends to the right buttock region. (Fig 14a courtesy of Bashar Safar, MD,
Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md.)

cauliflower-like appearance (64). Giant condy-
lomas are generally slow growing and are locally
aggressive, with invasion of the surrounding
tissue; however, distant metastases are rare (63).
Verrucous carcinoma is strongly associated with
HPV infection and is commonly seen in patients
with HIV infection (63). Giant condyloma acu-
minatum has a malignant transformation rate as
high as 50% (64). Treatment strategies include
wide local excision; however, recurrence rates
as high as 66% after wide local excision have
prompted the use of neoadjuvant or adjuvant
chemoradiation therapy to decrease the rate of
recurrence (63,64). MR imaging is useful for
evaluating the extent and the depth of inva-
sion of these locally aggressive lesions (65–67).
Condyloma acuminatum typically appears as an
infiltrative heterogeneously enhancing mass that
dissects into the perianal region. Lesions dem-
onstrate intrinsic T2 hyperintensity relative to
the surrounding musculature (Fig 14) (65–67).

Secondary Tumors

Anal involvement from malignancies arising
from adjacent organs such as the rectum, cervix,
prostate, and musculoskeletal system can occur
and may mimic primary anal carcinoma (68,69).
Rectal carcinomas involving the lower one-third
of the rectum have a greater local recurrence
rate and a higher risk of positive circumferen-
tial resection margins than do high-rectal and
midrectal cancer, secondary to the tapering
of the mesorectum and the proximity to the
anal sphincter and the pelvic organs (70). It is
imperative that radiologists thoroughly exam-
ine the tumor borders, the depth of extension,
and the relation to the anal sphincters, to guide
optimal surgical management. Surgical resec-
tion for rectal tumors includes total mesorectal

resection, either from a low anterior resection
or from abdominoperineal resection, depending
on the involvement of the anal sphincters (Fig
15) (71). Tumors away from the anal sphincters
can be treated with low anterior resection, with
resection of the tumor and with a continence-
preserving anastomosis. Abdominoperineal
resection is performed in patients with rectal
tumors that involve the sphincter complex.

Prostate cancer can metastasize to the anal
region by means of direct invasion or lymphatic
spread (Fig 16) (72). Spread of cervical cancer
to adjacent organs such as the urinary blad-
der, anal canal, and rectum constitutes stage
IV disease. Cervical cancer usually appears as a
hyperintense mass on T2-weighted MR images
(73). Extension of cervical cancer to the anorec-
tal mucosa might appear as segmental muco-
sal thickening or segmental disruption of the
hypointense wall (Fig 17) (73).

Conclusion

A wide spectrum of tumors of the anal canal
and perianal region either originate from the
anal canal and anal margin or result from direct
extension of tumors from adjacent organs.
Although some tumors of the anal and perianal
region have characteristic imaging findings that
permit their diagnosis, tissue sampling is often
warranted to confirm histopathologic findings,
to establish a definitive diagnosis. Nevertheless,
familiarity with the epidemiology, pathogenesis,
imaging features, and treatment of these cancers
can aid radiologic diagnoses and guide appropri-
ate patient treatment.

Acknowledgment.—We  acknowledge  the  Media  Department
of the Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Ariz, for providing illustrations
(Figs 1a and 2a).

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 5

Surabhi et al  1351

Figure 15.  Rectal adenocarcinoma involving the lowest one-third of the rectum in a 45-year-
old woman, with direct extension and involvement of the anal canal. Sagittal T2-weighted (a)
and gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted (b) MR images show an infiltrative mass (arrows) in-
volving the lower rectum and anal canal, with heterogeneous contrast enhancement.

Figure  16.  Adenoid  cystic  carcinoma  of  the  prostate  in  a  71-year-old  man  with  contigu-
ous  involvement  of  the  anal  canal.  Sagittal  T2-weighted  (a)  and  contrast-enhanced  T1-
weighted  (b)  MR  images  show  an  infiltrative  mass  (arrows)  centered  in  the  region  of  the
prostate, with extension to and involvement of the anal canal. The mass demonstrates hetero-
geneous contrast enhancement in b.

Figure 17.  Stage IV cervical carcinoma in a 68-year-old woman with contiguous involvement of the
anal canal. Axial T2-weighted (a) and contrast-enhanced T1-weighted (b) MR images show a large, het-
erogeneously enhancing infiltrating mass (arrows) invading the left pelvic sidewall, the urethra, and the
anorectum, with involvement of the anal sphincters.

1352  September-October 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

References
  1. Osborne MC, Maykel J, Johnson EK, Steele SR. Anal squa-
mous cell carcinoma: an evolution in disease and management.
World J Gastroenterol 2014;20(36):13052–13059.

  2. Howlander N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER cancer
statistics review, 1975–2011. National Cancer Institute Web
site. http://seer.cancer.gov/archive/csr/1975_2011/. Published
online April 2014.

  3. Leonard D, Beddy D, Dozois EJ. Neoplasms of anal canal
and perianal skin. Clin Colon Rectal Surg 2011;24(1):54–63.
  4. Hamilton SR, Aaltonen LA, eds. World Health Organiza-
tion classification of tumours: pathology and genetics of
tumours  of  the  digestive  system.  Lyon,  France:  IARC,
2000. International Agency for Research on Cancer Web
site.  https://www.iarc.fr/en/publications/pdfs-online/pat-
gen/bb2/BB2.pdf.

  5. Franceschi S, De Vuyst H. Human papillomavirus vaccines
and anal carcinoma. Curr Opin HIV AIDS 2009;4(1):57–63.
  6. Solan P, Davis B. Anorectal anatomy and imaging techniques.

Gastroenterol Clin North Am 2013;42(4):701–712.

  7. Ozaki T, Flege S, Kevric M, et al. Osteosarcoma of the pelvis:
experience of the Cooperative Osteosarcoma Study Group.
J Clin Oncol 2003;21(2):334–341.

  8. Patel P, Hanson DL, Sullivan PS, et al. Incidence of types
of cancer among HIV-infected persons compared with the
general population in the United States, 1992–2003. Ann
Intern Med 2008;148(10):728–736.

  9. deSouza NM, Williams AD, Gilderdale DJ. High-resolution
magnetic resonance imaging of the anal sphincter using a dedi-
cated endoanal receiver coil. Eur Radiol 1999;9(3):436–443.
10.  O’Malley RB, Al-Hawary MM, Kaza RK, Wasnik AP, Liu
PS, Hussain HK. Rectal imaging. II. Perianal fistula evalu-
ation on pelvic MRI—what the radiologist needs to know.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 2012;199(1):W43–W53.

11.  Torkzad MR, Karlbom U. MRI for assessment of anal fistula.

Insights Imaging 2010;1(2):62–71.

12.  Kochhar R, Plumb AA, Carrington BM, Saunders M. Im-
aging of anal carcinoma. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2012;199
(3):W335–W344.

13.  Balachandra B, Marcus V, Jass JR. Poorly differentiated tu-
mours of the anal canal: a diagnostic strategy for the surgical
pathologist. Histopathology 2007;50(1):163–174.

14.  Uronis HE, Bendell JC. Anal cancer: an overview. Oncologist

2007;12(5):524–534.

15.  Gourtsoyianni  S,  Goh  V.  MRI  of  anal  cancer:  assessing
response to definitive chemoradiotherapy. Abdom Imaging
2014;39(1):2–17.

16.  Kremer V, Kremer A, Baldwin K, Sirsi S, Rafiaa A. Metastatic
prostate carcinoma mimicking primary anal cancer. Urology
2012;79(5):e75–e76.

17.  Bejarano  PA,  Boutros  M,  Berho  M.  Anal  squamous
intraepithelial  neoplasia.  Gastroenterol  Clin  North  Am
2013;42(4):893–912.

18.  Foust RL, Dean PJ, Stoler MH, Moinuddin SM. Intraepi-
thelial neoplasia of the anal canal in hemorrhoidal tissue: a
study of 19 cases. Hum Pathol 1991;22(6):528–534.

19.  Abbasakoor F, Boulos PB. Anal intraepithelial neoplasia. Br

J Surg 2005;92(3):277–290.

20.  Simpson  JA,  Scholefield  JH.  Diagnosis  and  management
of  anal  intraepithelial  neoplasia  and  anal  cancer.  BMJ
2011;343:d6818.

21.  Parkin DM. The global health burden of infection-asso-
ciated  cancers  in  the  year  2002.  Int  J  Cancer  2006;118
(12):3030–3044.

22.  Daling JR, Weiss NS, Hislop TG, et al. Sexual practices,
sexually transmitted diseases, and the incidence of anal cancer.
N Engl J Med 1987;317(16):973–977.

23.  Edge SB, Byrd DR, Compton CC, Fritz AG, Greene FL,
Trotti A, eds. AJCC cancer staging manual. 7th ed. New
York, NY: Springer, 2010.

24.  Saboo  SS,  Zukotynski  K,  Shinagare  AB,  Krajewski  KM,
Ramaiya  N.  Anal  carcinoma:  FDG  PET/CT  in  staging,
response  evaluation,  and  follow-up.  Abdom  Imaging
2013;38(4):728–735.

25.  Schwarz JK, Siegel BA, Dehdashti F, Myerson RJ, Fleshman
JW,  Grigsby  PW.  Tumor  response  and  survival  predicted

by post-therapy FDG-PET/CT in anal cancer. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 2008;71(1):180–186.

26.  Belkacémi Y, Berger C, Poortmans P, et al. Management
of primary anal canal adenocarcinoma: a large retrospective
study from the Rare Cancer Network. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 2003;56(5):1274–1283.

27.  Tarazi R, Nelson RL. Anal adenocarcinoma: a comprehensive

review. Semin Surg Oncol 1994;10(3):235–240.

28.  Longo WE, Vernava AM III, Wade TP, Coplin MA, Virgo
KS, Johnson FE. Rare anal canal cancers in the U.S. vet-
eran: patterns of disease and results of treatment. Am Surg
1995;61(6):495–500.

29.  Joon DL, Chao MW, Ngan SY, Joon ML, Guiney MJ. Pri-
mary adenocarcinoma of the anus: a retrospective analysis.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1999;45(5):1199–1205.
30.  Winburn GB. Anal carcinoma or “just hemorrhoids”? Am

Surg 2001;67(11):1048–1058.

31.  Beets-Tan RG, Beets GL. Rectal cancer: review with emphasis

on MR imaging. Radiology 2004;232(2):335–346.

32.  Ogawa H, Haneda S, Shibata C, et al. Adenocarcinoma as-
sociated with perianal fistulas in Crohn’s disease. Anticancer
Res 2013;33(2):685–689.

33.  Yang BL, Shao WJ, Sun GD, Chen YQ, Huang JC. Perianal
mucinous  adenocarcinoma  arising  from  chronic  anorectal
fistulae: a review from single institution. Int J Colorectal Dis
2009;24(9):1001–1006.

34.  Singer M, Mutch MG. Anal melanoma. Clin Colon Rectal

Surg 2006;19(2):78–87.

35.  Podnos YD, Tsai NC, Smith D, Ellenhorn JD. Factors af-
fecting survival in patients with anal melanoma. Am Surg
2006;72(10):917–920.

36.  Ojima  Y,  Nakatsuka  H,  Haneji  H,  et  al.  Primary  anorec-
tal  malignant  melanoma:  report  of  a  case.  Surg  Today
1999;29(2):170–173.

37.  Ghimire P, Wu GY, Zhu L. Primary gastrointestinal lym-
phoma. World J Gastroenterol 2011;17(6):697–707.

38.  Times  M.  Colorectal  lymphoma.  Clin  Colon  Rectal  Surg

2011;24(3):135–141.

39.  Ioachim HL, Antonescu C, Giancotti F, Dorsett B, Weinstein
MA. EBV-associated anorectal lymphomas in patients with
acquired immune deficiency syndrome. Am J Surg Pathol
1997;21(9):997–1006.

40.  Stanojevic GZ, Nestorovic MD, Brankovic BR, Stojanovic
MP,  Jovanovic  MM,  Radojkovic  MD.  Primary  colorec-
tal  lymphoma:  an  overview.  World  J  Gastrointest  Oncol
2011;3(1):14–18.

41.  Schwenzer  NF,  Pfannenberg  AC.  PET/CT,  MR,  and
PET/MR in lymphoma and melanoma. Semin Nucl Med
2015;45(4):322–331.

42.  Tripathi M, Parshad S, Karwasra RK, Gupta A, Srivastva S,
Sarwal A. Retroperitoneal lymphangioma in an adult: a case re-
port of a rare clinical entity. Case Rep Surg 2015;2015:732531.
43.  Chung JH, Suh YL, Park IA, et al. A pathologic study of abdomi-
nal lymphangiomas. J Korean Med Sci 1999;14(3):257–262.
44.  Levy AD, Cantisani V, Miettinen M. Abdominal lymphan-
giomas: imaging features with pathologic correlation. AJR
Am J Roentgenol 2004;182(6):1485–1491.

45.  Ayyappan AP, Jhaveri KS, Haider MA. Radiological assessment
of mesenteric and retroperitoneal cysts in adults: is there a role
for chemical shift MRI? Clin Imaging 2011;35(2):127–132.

46.  Kim MJ, Lee SH, Youk EG, Lee S, Choi JH, Cho KJ. Solitary
myofibroma of the sigmoid colon: case report and review of
the literature. Diagn Pathol 2013;8:90.

47.  Fletcher CD, Unni KK, Mertens F, eds. World Health Or-
ganization classification of tumours: pathology and genetics
of tumours of soft tissue and bone. Lyon, France: IARC,
2002.  International  Agency  for  Research  on  Cancer  Web
site. https://www.iarc.fr/en/publications/pdfs-online/pat-gen/
bb5/bb5-cover.pdf.

48.  Koujok K, Ruiz RE, Hernandez RJ. Myofibromatosis: imag-
ing characteristics. Pediatr Radiol 2005;35(4):374–380.
49.  Eich GF, Hoeffel JC, Tschäppeler H, Gassner I, Willi UV.
Fibrous tumours in children: imaging features of a heteroge-
neous group of disorders. Pediatr Radiol 1998;28(7):500–509.
50.  Kusminsky RE, Bailey W. Leiomyomas of the rectum and
anal canal: report of six cases and review of the literature.
Dis Colon Rectum 1977;20(7):580–599.

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 5

Surabhi et al  1353

51.  Miettinen  M,  Furlong  M,  Sarlomo-Rikala  M,  Burke  A,
Sobin  LH,  Lasota  J.  Gastrointestinal  stromal  tumors,  in-
tramural leiomyomas, and leiomyosarcomas in the rectum
and  anus:  a  clinicopathologic,  immunohistochemical,  and
molecular  genetic  study  of  144  cases.  Am  J  Surg  Pathol
2001;25(9):1121–1133.

52.  Lee SH, Ha HK, Byun JY, et al. Radiological features of
leiomyomatous tumors of the colon and rectum. J Comput
Assist Tomogr 2000;24(3):407–412.

53.  Szklaruk J, Tamm EP, Choi H, Varavithya V. MR imaging of
common and uncommon large pelvic masses. RadioGraphics
2003;23(2):403–424.

54.  Walker EA, Salesky JS, Fenton ME, Murphey MD. Magnetic
resonance imaging of malignant soft tissue neoplasms in the
adult. Radiol Clin North Am 2011;49(6):1219–1234, vi.
55.  Singhal S, Singhal A, Tugnait R, et al. Anorectal gastroin-
testinal stromal tumor: a case report and literature review.
Case Rep Gastrointest Med 2013;2013:934875.

56.  Sandrasegaran K, Rajesh A, Rushing DA, Rydberg J, Akisik
FM, Henley JD. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors: CT and
MRI findings. Eur Radiol 2005;15(7):1407–1414.

57.  Koch  MR,  Jagannathan  JP,  Shinagare  AB,  et  al.  Imaging
features of primary anorectal gastrointestinal stromal tumors
with  clinical  and  pathologic  correlation.  Cancer  Imaging
2013;12(3):557–565.

58.  Steeper TA, Rosai J. Aggressive angiomyxoma of the female
pelvis  and  perineum:  report  of  nine  cases  of  a  distinctive
type of gynecologic soft-tissue neoplasm. Am J Surg Pathol
1983;7(5):463–475.

59.  Surabhi VR, Garg N, Frumovitz M, Bhosale P, Prasad SR,
Meis JM. Aggressive angiomyxomas: a comprehensive imag-
ing review with clinical and histopathologic correlation. AJR
Am J Roentgenol 2014;202(6):1171–1178.

60.  Sahai A, Kodner IJ. Premalignant neoplasms and squamous
cell carcinoma of the anal margin. Clin Colon Rectal Surg
2006;19(2):88–93.

61.  Perez DR, Trakarnsanga A, Shia J, et al. Management and
outcome of perianal Paget’s disease: a 6-decade institutional
experience. Dis Colon Rectum 2014;57(6):747–751.

62.  Niederkohr RD, Gambhir SS. F-18 FDG PET/CT imaging
of extramammary Paget disease of the perianal region. Clin
Nucl Med 2006;31(9):561–563.

63.  Wietfeldt ED, Thiele J. Malignancies of the anal margin
and  perianal  skin.  Clin  Colon  Rectal  Surg  2009;22(2):
127–135.

64.  Chu  QD,  Vezeridis  MP,  Libbey  NP,  Wanebo  HJ.  Giant
condyloma  acuminatum  (Buschke-Lowenstein  tumor)  of
the anorectal and perianal regions: analysis of 42 cases. Dis
Colon Rectum 1994;37(9):950–957.

65.  Grassegger  A,  Höpfl  R,  Hussl  H,  Wicke  K,  Fritsch  P.
Buschke-Loewenstein tumour infiltrating pelvic organs. Br
J Dermatol 1994;130(2):221–225.

66.  Takezawa Y, Shimizu N, Kurokawa K, Suzuki K, Yamanaka
H. Appearance on magnetic resonance imaging of Buschke-
Lowenstein tumour. Br J Urol 1996;78(2):308–309.
67.  Zemtsov A, Koss W, Dixon L, Tyring S, Rady P. Anal ver-
rucous  carcinoma  associated  with  human  papilloma  virus
type  11:  magnetic  resonance  imaging  and  flow  cytometry
evaluation. Arch Dermatol 1992;128(4):564–565.

68.  Kawahara K, Akamine S, Takahashi T, et al. Anal metastasis
from carcinoma of the lung: report of a case. Surg Today
1994;24(12):1101–1103.

69.  Abbas TO, Al-Naimi AR, Yakoob RA, Al-Bozom IA, Alo-
baidly AM. Prostate cancer metastases to the rectum: a case
report. World J Surg Oncol 2011;9:56.

70.  Berardi R, Maccaroni E, Onofri A, et al. Locally advanced
rectal cancer: the importance of a multidisciplinary approach.
World J Gastroenterol 2014;20(46):17279–17287.

71.  Heald  RJ,  Husband  EM,  Ryall  RD.  The  mesorectum  in
rectal cancer surgery: the clue to pelvic recurrence? Br J Surg
1982;69 (10):613–616.

72.  Boonsirikamchai P, Choi S, Frank SJ, et al. MR imaging of
prostate cancer in radiation oncology: what radiologists need
to know. RadioGraphics 2013;33(3):741–761.

73.  Okamoto Y, Tanaka YO, Nishida M, Tsunoda H, Yoshikawa
H, Itai Y. MR imaging of the uterine cervix: imaging-patho-
logic correlation. RadioGraphics 2003;23(2):425–445.

This journal-based SA-CME activity has been approved for AMA PRA Category 1 CreditTM. See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

