This copy is for personal use only. To order printed copies, contact reprints@rsna.org

1411

Clinical, Imaging, and Pathologic
Features of Conditions with Com-
bined Esophageal and Cutaneous
Manifestations

Matthew H. Lee, MD
Meghan G. Lubner, MD
J. Klint Peebles, MD
Molly A. Hinshaw, MD
Christine O. Menias, MD
Marc S. Levine, MD
Perry J. Pickhardt, MD

Abbreviations: AIDS = acquired immunode­
ficiency  syndrome,  CMV  =  cytomegalovirus,
EB = epidermolysis bullosa, HIV = human im­
munodeficiency  virus,  HSV  =  herpes  simplex
virus,  LPO  =  left  posterior  oblique,  MMP  =
mucous membrane pemphigoid, SCC = squa­
mous cell carcinoma

RadioGraphics 2019; 39:1411–1434

https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.2019190052

Content Codes:

From  the  Department  of  Radiology,  Na­
val  Medical  Center  Camp  Lejeune,  Camp
Lejeune, NC (M.H.L.); Departments of Radi­
ology (M.G.L., P.J.P.) and Dermatology (J.K.P.,
M.A.H.),  University  of  Wisconsin  School  of
Medicine  and  Public  Health,  Madison,  Wis;
Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Scotts­
dale, Ariz (C.O.M.); and Department of Radi­
ology,  Hospital  of  the  University  of  Pennsyl­
vania,  Philadelphia,  Pa  (M.S.L.).  Recipient  of
a  Magna  Cum  Laude  award  for  an  education
exhibit  at  the  2018  RSNA  Annual  Meeting.
Received  March  10,  2019;  revision  requested
April  15  and  received  May  10;  accepted  May
20.  For  this  journal­based  SA­CME  activity,
the authors M.G.L., M.A.H., M.S.L., and P.J.P.
have  provided  disclosures  (see  end  of  article);
all other authors, the editor, and the reviewers
have  disclosed  no  relevant  relationships.  Ad-
dress  correspondence  to  M.H.L.,  Depart­
ment of Radiology, Naval Medical Center San
Diego,  34800  Bob Wilson  Dr,  San  Diego,  CA
92134 (e­mail: matthew.harlanlee@gmail.com).

The views expressed in this article are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the official
policy or position of the Department of the Navy,
Department  of  Defense,  or  U.S.  Government.

The  author(s)  are  military  service  members.
This  work  was  prepared  as  part  of  official  du­
ties. Title  17  U.S.C.  105  provides  that  “Copy­
right  protection  under  this  title  is  not  available
for any work of the United States Government.”

A variety of clinically significant conditions can affect both the
esophagus and the skin. Esophageal and cutaneous manifestations
may directly reflect the underlying disease process, as in infections
such as herpes simplex virus, bullous diseases such as epidermolysis
bullosa and mucous membrane pemphigoid, connective tissue dis­
eases such as systemic sclerosis, and inflammatory diseases such as
lichen planus. Alternatively, esophageal and cutaneous findings may
result from conditions that are closely associated with and poten­
tially pathognomonic for but distinct from the underlying disease
process, as in genetic diseases such as Cowden syndrome or para­
neoplastic syndromes such as acrokeratosis paraneoplastica. Other
diseases such as Crohn disease may have cutaneous manifestations
that directly reflect the same underlying inflammatory process that
affects the gastrointestinal tract or cutaneous manifestations that
represent reactive or associated conditions distinct from the un­
derlying inflammatory process. The cutaneous manifestations of
disease may precede, coincide with, or follow the esophageal mani­
festations of disease. The authors present the characteristic clinical
features and imaging findings associated with common and uncom­
mon conditions that have esophageal and cutaneous manifestations.
Each condition is presented with a brief overview, discussion of
salient clinical and cutaneous manifestations, and description of
the typical esophageal imaging findings, with particular attention to
implications for diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. Recognition
of potential associations between cutaneous lesions and esophageal
imaging findings is important for establishing a specific diagnosis or
generating a meaningful differential diagnosis.

Work of the U.S. Government published under an exclusive license with the RSNA.

SA-CME LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After completing this journal-based SA-CME activity, participants will be able to:

 ■ Identify common and uncommon conditions that have esophageal and cutaneous
manifestations.

 ■ Describe the characteristic cutaneous manifestations of conditions that affect the
esophagus and skin.

 ■ Recognize the characteristic imaging features of conditions that affect the esophagus
and skin.

See rsna.org/learning-center-rg.

MULTISYSTEM RADIOLOGY

1412  September-October 2019

radiographics.rsna.org

TEACHING POINTS
 ■ Double-contrast  esophagography  is  the  study  of  choice  for
assessment  of  CMV  esophagitis.  Imaging  findings  include
multiple  small  ulcers,  which  may  be  indistinguishable  from
those of HSV esophagitis, or more commonly, one or more
giant (>1 cm in diameter), flat, ovoid or diamond-shaped ul-
cers. Large ulcers may appear similar to long intramural sinus
tracts. Therefore, the presence of giant ulcers favors CMV or
HIV esophagitis over HSV esophagitis, which is usually associ-
ated  with  small  ulcers.  However,  CMV  and  HIV  esophagitis
are indistinguishable at esophagography, so endoscopy and
biopsy are required for definitive diagnosis because of differ-
ing approaches to therapy: ganciclovir for CMV esophagitis
and steroids for HIV esophagitis.

 ■ Double-contrast  esophagography  has  sensitivity  of  approxi-
mately  90%  in  detecting  Candida  esophagitis  compared
with  endoscopy.  Characteristic  features  on  double-contrast
esophagrams include discrete, linear, longitudinally oriented
plaque-like  lesions  that  appear  as  linear  or  irregular  defects
with normal intervening mucosa and no ulcers.

 ■ Systemic sclerosis can involve virtually any organ and esopha-
geal involvement is common, affecting 67%–79% of patients
with  diffuse  cutaneous  scleroderma  and  55%–67%  of  pa-
tients  with  limited  cutaneous  scleroderma.  Visceral  involve-
ment largely determines the prognosis. Esophageal dysfunc-
tion  is  considered  the  most  common  visceral  complication,
but lung involvement (eg, lung fibrosis; nonspecific interstitial
pneumonia more common than usual interstitial pneumonia)
is the leading cause of death.

 ■ Although once thought to be rare, esophageal lichen planus
has been reported in more than 50% of patients with muco-
cutaneous  lichen  planus  and  is  historically  underrecognized
and  underreported.  Patients  with  esophageal  lichen  planus
usually present with dysphagia secondary to development of
esophageal strictures. Esophageal findings may precede cu-
taneous findings and may be the only manifestation of the
disease.  Isolated  esophageal  involvement  in  the  absence  of
extraesophageal findings has not uncommonly been report-
ed as a cause of long-standing dysphagia before diagnosis of
lichen planus.

 ■ Acrokeratosis  paraneoplastica  is  a  rare  paraneoplastic  syn-
drome,  one  of  two  conditions  known  as  Bazex  syndrome,
which was described in 1965 as a specific cutaneous marker
of underlying malignancy involving the aerodigestive tract. It
is  most  commonly  associated  with  SCCs,  including  SCC  of
the esophagus.

Introduction
A variety of clinically significant conditions affect
the esophagus and skin because these structures
have similar developmental origins and are lined
by stratified squamous epithelium. The diverse
spectrum of diseases that have combined esopha­
geal and cutaneous manifestations includes
infections, bullous diseases, connective tissue
diseases, inflammatory diseases, genetic diseases,
malignancies, and drug­induced conditions. The
esophageal and cutaneous manifestations may
directly reflect the underlying disease process
or may result from conditions that are closely
associated with but distinct from the underlying
disease process.

The cutaneous manifestations of disease
may precede, coincide with, or develop after the
esophageal manifestations. Because of visible and
potentially dramatic cutaneous findings, patients
and referring clinicians may be more acutely aware
of cutaneous involvement compared with subtle or
nonspecific esophageal symptoms. Awareness of
distinct cutaneous and imaging features of diseases
affecting the esophagus and skin can help establish
a specific diagnosis or aid in generating meaning­
ful differential diagnostic considerations.

The purposes of this review are to (a) present

common and uncommon conditions that affect
the esophagus and skin, (b) describe charac­
teristic clinical and cutaneous manifestations
of diseases affecting the esophagus and skin,
and (c) identify characteristic imaging features
of diseases affecting the esophagus and skin
with endoscopic and pathologic correlation. We
provide an in­depth discussion of each entity,
highlighting characteristic and distinctive clini­
cal and esophageal imaging features.

Infectious Diseases
Table 1 summarizes the salient imaging and cuta­
neous findings of infectious diseases affecting the
esophagus and skin.

HSV Infection
Herpes simplex virus (HSV), typically HSV type
1, is a well­recognized causative agent of viral ul­
cerative esophagitis. Herpes esophagitis is among
the most common causes of infectious esopha­
gitis, and the esophagus is the most commonly
involved visceral organ in disseminated herpes­
virus infection (1). HSV esophagitis typically
develops in immunocompromised patients with
disseminated HSV infection; transplant patients
are particularly susceptible.

Although classically considered an opportu­
nistic infection in immunocompromised patients
(2), herpes esophagitis may also develop in
healthy immunocompetent individuals, albeit as a
rare and distinct typically self­limited entity (3,4).
Therefore, normal immune status should not
preclude a diagnosis of herpes esophagitis in the
appropriate clinical context.

In immunocompromised patients, com­

mon clinical manifestations of HSV esophagitis
include severe odynophagia or dysphagia. In
contrast, immunocompetent patients with herpes
esophagitis may develop characteristic prodromes
consisting of fever, headache, upper respiratory
infection, and myalgia for 3–10 days before the
sudden onset of severe odynophagia.

Cutaneous manifestations of HSV infection in­
clude cold sores/fever blisters; herpes gladiatorum
or “mat” herpes; herpetic whitlow, which mani­

RG  •  Volume 39  Number 5

Lee et al  1413

Table 1: Infectious Diseases with Esophageal and Cutaneous Manifestations

Infectious
Disease

Herpes simplex
virus (HSV)
infection

Imaging Findings

Skin Findings

Small, discrete, punctate,

Painful grouped vesicles on ery­

linear, or stellate ulcers on
otherwise normal back­
ground mucosa

thematous base

Cold sores/fever blisters
Herpes gladiatorum (“mat”

Halo of surrounding edema

herpes)

Imaging Differential Diag­
nosis

Other viral infections
Reflux esophagitis
Drug­induced esophagitis

Herpetic whitlow: painful vesicles

on fingers

Genital ulcers (HSV type 2 infec­

tion)

No specific cutaneous manifesta­

HIV esophagitis if one or

tions

May develop centralized petechial
eruption, nonspecific morbil­
liform exanthema, refractory
anogenital ulcers, or cutaneous
vasculitis

Oral thrush: white patches affect­

ing oropharyngeal mucosa
Erythematous hyperkeratotic

plaques

more giant ulcers

HIV or HSV esophagitis if
multiple small ulcers
Crohn disease if known

Crohn disease elsewhere

Glycogenic acanthosis
Reflux esophagitis
Herpes esophagitis

Cytomegalovirus
(CMV) infec­
tion

One or more giant (>1 cm),
flat, ovoid or diamond­
shaped ulcers

Candida esopha­

gitis

Small ulcers (less common),
may be indistinguishable
from those of HSV esopha­
gitis

Linear longitudinal plaque­
like lesions with normal
intervening mucosa

Fulminant form: grossly irreg­
ular or “shaggy” esophagus
with confluent plaques and
pseudomembranes

Human immuno­
deficiency virus
(HIV) infection

Giant ulcers indistinguish­
able from those of CMV
infection

Numerous associated infectious
(eg, HSV, Candida), inflam­
matory (eg, HIV­associated
eosinophilic folliculitis), and
neoplastic (eg, Kaposi sarco­
ma) cutaneous conditions

CMV infection
HSV infection
Crohn disease

(Fig 1), which can superinfect a primary skin
eruption (eg, eczema herpeticum in those with
atopic dermatitis) and become disseminated,
particularly in immunocompromised patients.
The treatment approach depends on the patient’s
underlying immune status and includes oral or
intravenous acyclovir and, if needed, treatment
with analgesics and sedation.

Double­contrast esophagography is the study

of choice for assessment of herpes esophagitis.
The characteristic imaging findings of herpes
esophagitis are small discrete ulcers on otherwise
normal background mucosa (Fig 2). The ulcers
may have punctate, linear, or stellate morphology,
and a mound or halo of surrounding edema may
be observed (2,5).

In an immunocompromised patient, the com­
bination of odynophagia and small ulcers without
plaques is highly suggestive of herpes esopha­
gitis. In contrast, multiple plaque­like lesions
or plaques and ulcers should suggest Candida
esophagitis. These characteristic imaging find­
ings avoid the need for endoscopy. When herpes
esophagitis develops in an immunocompetent

Figure  1.  HSV  type  1  infection  in  a  young  girl.  Pho-
tograph shows multiple clustered perioral vesicles with
an erythematous base, a characteristic cutaneous find-
ing  of  HSV  infection.  (Courtesy  of  Leah  Spring,  DO,
Uniformed  Services  University  of  the  Health  Sciences,
Bethesda, Md.)

fests as a painful lesion on the finger; and genital
ulcers (typically in HSV type 2 infection). The
characteristic skin findings are painful, grouped,
umbilicated vesicles on an erythematous base

1414  September-October 2019

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  2.  HSV  esophagitis.  (a)  Upright  left
posterior  oblique  (LPO)  spot  fluoroscopic  im-
age shows multiple discrete oval (black arrows)
and  linear  (arrowhead)  ulcers  with  a  radio-
lucent  halo  of  surrounding  edema  (white  ar-
row). (b) Endoscopic image in another patient
shows the endoscopic correlate to the findings
at  esophagography,  with  similar-appearing
round  and  linear  ulcers  on  a  background  of
normal mucosa.

patient, imaging findings typically consist of in­
numerable punctate ulcers clustered in the mid­
esophagus. The diminutive ulcer size presumably
reflects an intact immune system that prevents
enlargement of the ulcers.

The differential diagnosis for multiple small
esophageal ulcers includes other viral infections
(ie, cytomegalovirus [CMV] and human immu­
nodeficiency virus [HIV]), reflux esophagitis, and
drug­induced esophagitis.

CMV Infection
CMV is a member of the herpesvirus family
that is endemic throughout the world. The age­
adjusted seroprevalence in the United States is
approximately 50% (6). After a typically as­
ymptomatic or self­limited primary infection,
CMV establishes a lifelong latent infection that
can result in clinically significant disease and
opportunistic infection, particularly in immuno­
compromised patients. Patients with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or trans­

plants are particularly susceptible to opportu­
nistic CMV esophagitis (7). Invasive forms of
CMV infection may affect virtually any organ
system, including the heart, lungs, eyes, gas­
trointestinal tract, kidneys, liver, pancreas, and
central nervous system (8).

Primary disease may cause no symptoms, or
affected patients may present with fever, malaise,
odynophagia, or nausea and vomiting. Although
there are no specific cutaneous manifestations of
CMV infection, some individuals may develop a
centralized petechial eruption, nonspecific mor­
billiform exanthem, or cutaneous vasculitis.

Double­contrast esophagography is the study

of choice for assessment of CMV esophagitis.
Imaging findings include multiple small ulcers,
which may be indistinguishable from those of
HSV esophagitis, or more commonly, one or
more giant (>1 cm in diameter), flat, ovoid or
diamond­shaped ulcers (Fig 3) (9). Large ulcers
may appear similar to long intramural sinus
tracts. Therefore, the presence of giant ulcers

RG  •  Volume 39  Number 5

Lee et al  1415

Figure  4.  High-power  photomicrograph  of  a  biopsy  speci-
men  shows  characteristic  intranuclear  “owl’s-eye”  inclusions
within vascular endothelial cells. (Courtesy of Brian Swick, MD,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.)

Figure  5.  High-power  photomicrograph  of  a  biopsy  speci-
men  shows  nuclear  staining  of  CMV-infected  cells  with  CMV
immunostain,  confirming  the  diagnosis.  (Courtesy  of  Brian
Swick, MD, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.)

3.  CMV

Figure
esophagitis.
(a) Upright LPO spot fluoroscopic
image in an immunocompromised
patient  shows  a  giant  ulcer  (ar-
rows) in profile in the distal esoph-
agus.  (b)  Spot  endoscopic  image
in another patient shows a healing
giant  ulcer  (arrows)  in  the  lower
esophagus.

favors CMV or HIV esophagitis over HSV
esophagitis, which is usually associated with small
ulcers. However, CMV and HIV esophagitis are
indistinguishable at esophagography, so endos­
copy and biopsy are required for definitive diag­
nosis because of differing approaches to therapy:
ganciclovir for CMV esophagitis and steroids for
HIV esophagitis.

The diagnosis is established with histopatho­
logic specimens showing cytoplasmic and intra­
nuclear inclusion bodies (Fig 4) and confirmed
with immunohistochemical staining (Fig 5) (10).
Differential diagnostic considerations for the
findings at esophagography include HIV esopha­

gitis if there are one or more giant ulcers, HIV
or HSV esophagitis if there are multiple small
ulcers, or Crohn disease if there is known Crohn
disease elsewhere in the gastrointestinal tract.

Candida Esophagitis
Candida esophagitis, a fungal esophagitis typically
caused by Candida albicans, is the most common
cause of infectious esophagitis. Candida esophagi­
tis usually occurs as an opportunistic infection in
immunocompromised patients with HIV infec­
tion or AIDS, hematologic malignancy, or trans­
plants. Less commonly, Candida esophagitis can
result from esophageal stasis and severe esopha­
geal dysmotility associated with scleroderma and
achalasia or acquired causes of esophageal stasis
(eg, fundoplication) (11,12).

Common clinical manifestations of disease
include odynophagia, dysphagia, and chest pain.
Patients may also present with oral thrush, which

1416  September-October 2019

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  6.  Candidiasis  in  a  78-year-old  woman  with  a
history  of  atypical  meningioma  and  long-term  steroid
therapy. (a) Photograph shows multifocal white patches
along the surface of the tongue, consistent with oral can-
didiasis. (b) Upright LPO spot fluoroscopic image shows
diffuse,  irregular,  linear,  longitudinally  oriented  small
plaques of varying size en face. The plaques have a cor-
responding  irregular  contour  in  profile  and  involve  the
entire thoracic esophagus. (c) Endoscopic image shows
the  endoscopic  correlate  to  the  esophagographic  find-
ings, with coalescent yellow-white mucosal plaques.

is found in approximately 50% of cases (5).
Cutaneous manifestations of Candida infection
are numerous and varied and include general­
ized candidiasis, intertrigo (maceration of the
folds with pustules), folliculitis, angular cheilitis,
balanitis, and disseminated disease. Character­
istic skin findings include erythematous hyper­
keratotic plaques. Oral thrush is characterized by
numerous white patches affecting the oropharyn­
geal mucosa. Treatment strategies include topical,
oral, and/or intravenous antifungal agents.

Double­contrast esophagography has sensitiv­

ity of approximately 90% in detecting Candida
esophagitis compared with endoscopy (13,14).
Characteristic features on double­contrast
esophagrams include discrete, linear, longitudi­
nally oriented plaque­like lesions that appear as
linear or irregular defects with normal interven­
ing mucosa and no ulcers (Fig 6). The fulminant
form of esophageal candidiasis—primarily seen
in patients with AIDS—is characterized by a
grossly irregular or “shaggy” esophagus, which
results from trapping of barium between dif­
fuse confluent plaques and pseudomembranes
(Fig 7). Sloughing plaques may result in deep
ulcers superimposed on a background of diffuse
plaque formation, but ulcers are rarely found
in the absence of plaques. Characteristic find­
ings of Candida esophagitis at double­contrast

esophagography avoid the need for endoscopy
before initiating therapy. Imaging can also be
used to monitor the response to therapy (14), but
follow­up studies are rarely needed if the patient’s
symptoms resolve.

Differential considerations for these imaging

findings include glycogenic acanthosis, reflux
esophagitis, or herpes esophagitis. Usually,
Candida esophagitis can be differentiated from
glycogenic acanthosis on the basis of plaque
morphology: linear plaques in candidiasis versus
rounded plaques in glycogenic acanthosis. The
two entities can also be distinguished by the clini­
cal manifestation: immunocompromised patients
with odynophagia in Candida esophagitis versus
older patients who are not immunocompromised
and have no esophageal symptoms in glycogenic

RG  •  Volume 39  Number 5

Lee et al  1417

Figure  8.  Eosinophilic  folliculitis  in  a  51-year-old
man  with  HIV  infection  (viral  load,  50  copies  per
milliliter; CD4 cell count, 232/μL [0.232 3 109/L]).
Photograph of the upper torso shows multiple pig-
mented papules.

Figure  7.  Fulminant  Candida  esopha-
gitis in a patient with AIDS. Upright LPO
spot fluoroscopic image shows an irregu-
lar  shaggy-appearing  esophagus,  which
is  secondary  to  coalescent  plaques  and
pseudomembrane formation.

acanthosis (5). Ulceration in Candida esophagitis
is distinguished from ulceration in HSV esopha­
gitis by coexisting plaque formation.

HIV Esophagitis and HIV-related
Conditions
Esophageal involvement is common in HIV
infection and may develop in severely immuno­
compromised patients with long­standing HIV
infection or AIDS or may occur as the initial
manifestation of disease (15). Various esophageal
and cutaneous conditions are associated with
HIV infection and AIDS, including opportunistic
infections (eg, Candida, CMV, and HSV esopha­
gitis) (16), inflammatory conditions, and malig­
nancies (eg, Kaposi sarcoma).

There are numerous cutaneous manifesta­
tions of HIV infection, including a mononucle­
osis­like morbilliform (measles­like) rash that
resembles a nonspecific viral exanthem and is

seen with an acute retroviral syndrome. Asso­
ciated infections that have distinct cutaneous
findings include HSV, human papilloma virus
(HPV), staphylococcal and streptococcal bacte­
rial infections, tuberculous and nontuberculous
mycobacterial infections, and fungal infections
(eg, tinea, Candida).

An example of an inflammatory condition is

HIV­associated eosinophilic folliculitis, which
is a chronic papulovesicular disease of unclear
cause that occurs during the late stages of
HIV infection, typically with CD4 cell counts
of less than 300/μL (0.3 3 109/L). Findings
include pruritic erythematous follicular papular
eruptions with excoriation (Fig 8) (17). Ka­
posi sarcoma is an example of HIV­associated
malignancy and is an AIDS­defining cancer
associated with herpesvirus­8 coinfection. These
tumors can manifest as red, purple, or bluish­
black patches and plaques (Fig 9).

HIV infection of the esophagus itself may
lead to development of giant ulcers that are
indistinguishable from those seen with CMV
infection (Fig 10). Whereas HIV ulcers typi­
cally heal with oral steroid therapy, CMV ulcers
require antiviral medication (eg, ganciclovir).
Because of differences in treatment approaches,
endoscopy is required to differentiate HIV
ulcers from CMV ulcers, and HIV esophagitis
is a diagnosis of exclusion. The primary differ­
ential considerations for the findings at double­
contrast esophagography include CMV or HSV
esophagitis or Crohn disease. As discussed

1418  September-October 2019

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  9.  Kaposi  sarcoma  in  a  54-year-old  man.
Photograph of the upper extremity shows a typical
purple plaque.

earlier, giant ulcers favor CMV or HIV esopha­
gitis over HSV esophagitis. Esophagography
may also reveal findings related to opportunistic
fungal (eg, Candida) or viral (eg, HSV) infec­
tions, facilitating diagnosis and treatment (16).

Bullous Diseases
Table 2 summarizes the salient imaging and cu­
taneous findings of bullous diseases affecting the
esophagus and skin.

Epidermolysis Bullosa
Originally described in 1886, epidermolysis
bullosa (EB) comprises a heterogeneous group
of rare genetic blistering diseases characterized
by mechanical fragility of the skin and mucous
membranes with subsequent blister formation
in response to minor trauma. As the skin and
esophagus are frequently subjected to minor
trauma, management of the EB family of blister­
ing disorders is often challenging.

The major types of EB are EB simplex, junc­
tional EB, dystrophic EB, and Kindler syndrome
(18). Categorization into these variants is deter­
mined by the ultrastructural level at which blis­
tering develops. EB is caused by mutations that
encode structural proteins found in the epithelium
(EB simplex), dermal­epithelial junction (junc­
tional EB), or papillary dermis (dystrophic EB).
Dystrophic EB (ie, EB dystrophica) is an
inherited disease variant with both autosomal
dominant and autosomal recessive forms, result­
ing from a mutation in the collagen VII gene
(COL701), and as such results in severe scarring
(18,19). It is the type most commonly associated
with radiographic findings and has various ad­
ditional subclassifications (20).

Patients with autosomal dominant or au­
tosomal recessive “other generalized type”

Figure 10.  Giant ulcer in a patient with
HIV esophagitis. Upright LPO spot fluoro-
scopic image shows a giant, irregular, oval
ulcer (arrows) in the lower esophagus.

dystrophic EB typically present with localized
blistering of the extremities—hands, feet, knees,
and elbows—whereas patients with autosomal
recessive “severe generalized” dystrophic EB ex­
perience severe widespread blistering beginning
in the early neonatal period (Fig 11) (21). The
upper gastrointestinal tract is a frequent site
of extracutaneous involvement, and common
gastrointestinal manifestations include oropha­
ryngeal blistering, tongue adhesions or fusion,
and esophageal strictures and webs, which can
result in severe dysphagia. Although dysphagia
occurs in up to 76% of patients with dystrophic
EB (22), esophageal strictures are observed even
in asymptomatic patients (21).

Esophagography is recommended in all pa­
tients with autosomal recessive dystrophic EB.
The characteristic imaging features at esophagog­
raphy include pharyngeal or esophageal strictures
involving the upper third of the esophagus in up
to 74% of patients (21). Concentric or asym­
metric esophageal narrowing and webs may be
observed. Strictures may be single or multiple
and may vary in length, with long­segment stric­
tures having smooth tapered margins (Fig 12)
(20). Differential considerations for these imag­

RG  •  Volume 39  Number 5

Lee et al  1419

Table 2: Bullous Diseases with Esophageal and Cutaneous Manifestations

Bullous Dis­
ease

Imaging Findings

Skin Findings

Epidermoly­
sis bullosa
(EB)

Pharyngeal or esophageal strictures of
variable length involving upper third
of esophagus

Major subtypes include EB simplex,
junctional EB, and dystrophic EB
Variable clinical manifestations depend­

ing on subtype, ranging from localized
blistering primarily at sites of trauma
(eg, hands, feet, knees, elbows) to
widespread blistering, skin fragil­
ity, nail dystrophy, atrophic scarring,
palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, mucosal
involvement, and increased risk of
cutaneous malignancy, including SCC
BP: pruritic subepidermal blisters; may
have mucosal and esophageal involve­
ment

MMP: blisters involving oral, ocular,

skin, genital, nasopharyngeal, esopha­
geal, and laryngeal mucosa

Pemphigoid
disorders
(BP, MMP)

Cervical esophageal webs; may be

multiple or complex

Smooth concentric or asymmetric

strictures, most common in upper
esophagus, although any part of
esophagus may be involved

Imaging
Differential
Diagnosis

Caustic

ingestion
stricture
Radiation
stricture

Caustic

ingestion
stricture
Drug­induced
esophagitis
stricture

Note.—BP = bullous pemphigoid, MMP = mucous membrane pemphigoid, SCC = squamous cell carcinoma.

ing findings include strictures caused by caustic
ingestion or mediastinal irradiation.

Pemphigoid Disorders
Pemphigoid disorders are a heterogeneous
group of autoimmune subepithelial blistering
diseases. Bullous pemphigoid is the most com­
mon type and is characterized by autoantibod­
ies targeting the hemidesmosome complex in
the cutaneous basement membrane (dermal­
epidermal junction). This condition manifests
as pruritic subepidermal blisters (Fig 13), but
mucous membrane and esophageal involvement
can occur (Fig 14).

Another variant is mucous membrane pem­
phigoid (MMP), also known as cicatricial pem­
phigoid. MMP is defined as “a group of putative
autoimmune, chronic inflammatory, subepithe­
lial blistering diseases predominantly affecting
mucous membranes that are characterized by
linear deposition of IgG, IgA, or [complement
component] C3 along the epithelial basement
membrane zone” (23). The oral, ocular, skin,
genital, nasopharyngeal, esophageal, and laryn­
geal mucosa may be involved (23), with the oral
mucosa being involved in nearly all cases, the
conjunctiva in approximately 60%–70%, and the
esophagus in 2%–13% (24).

MMP is predominantly a disease of the elderly

and is more common in women. Esophageal
involvement may occur at initial manifestation of
the disease or may not develop until years later
(25). The diagnosis is established by characteristic

Figure 11.  EB. (a) Photograph of the foot in a 5-day-
old boy shows characteristic blistering. (b) Low-power
photomicrograph in another patient shows a subepider-
mal bulla.

1420  September-October 2019

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  13.  Bullous  pemphigoid  in  a  63-year-
old woman. Photograph of the feet shows mul-
tiple blisters.

Figure 12.  EB in a 6-year-old girl. Right
anterior  oblique  (RAO)  spot  fluoroscopic
image shows a smoothly marginated and
tapered  stricture  (arrows)  in  the  upper
third of the esophagus.

immunohistopathologic findings of subepithelial
bullae and direct immunofluorescence showing
linear deposition of IgG (immunoglobulin G) or
C3 along the basement membrane zone (Fig 15)
(26). Treatment strategies include steroids and
other immunosuppressive agents, intravenous
immunoglobulin therapy, and endoscopic balloon
dilatation of esophageal webs and strictures.

Two patterns of disease are typically observed

at esophagography: upper esophageal webs and
smooth concentric or asymmetric strictures,
although any part of the esophagus may be in­
volved (Fig 16) (27). Cervical esophageal webs
are the most common imaging finding and may
be multiple or complex (28). Nasopharyngeal
reflux, aspiration, and esophageal intramural
pseudodiverticulosis are also associated with
esophageal involvement (28). The primary dif­
ferential considerations for similar­appearing
esophageal webs include Plummer­Vinson syn­
drome and bullous dermatoses. Differential con­
siderations for esophageal strictures are similar
to those for EB and include strictures caused by
caustic ingestion or drug­induced esophagitis.

Figure  14.  Bullous  pemphigoid.  RAO
spot fluoroscopic image shows multifocal
weblike  strictures  (arrows)  in  the  upper
esophagus  due  to  asymmetric  scarring
from previous bullae.

Connective Tissue Disease

Table 3 summarizes the salient imaging and cu­
taneous findings of connective tissue disease (eg,
systemic sclerosis) affecting the esophagus and skin.

Systemic Sclerosis
Systemic sclerosis, often referred to as sclero­
derma (“hard skin”), is a heterogeneous multi­

RG  •  Volume 39  Number 5

Lee et al  1421

Figure  15.  Bullous  pemphigoid.  Di-
rect  immunofluorescence  image  of  a
biopsy specimen shows IgG along the
dermal-epidermal  junction  (arrows),
confirming the presence of an autoim-
mune bullous disorder.

Figure  16.  (a)  Upright  LPO  spot  fluo-
roscopic image in an 80-year-old woman
with  MMP  shows  a  long-segment  ta-
pered  stricture  (arrows)  in  the  mid  and
upper esophagus with minimal mucosal
irregularity.  (b)  Spot  endoscopic  image
in another patient with MMP shows blis-
tering  and  an  expansile  hematoma  (ar-
rows) in the upper esophagus.

tyly, and telangiectases—to describe a variant of
limited scleroderma has fallen out of favor, as it
cannot typically be used to define a specific sub­
group of patients and often underestimates the
degree of organ involvement (30).

Women are disproportionately affected relative
to men, with ratios ranging from 3:1 to 14:1 (30).
Systemic sclerosis can involve virtually any organ
and esophageal involvement is common, affect­
ing 67%–79% of patients with diffuse cutane­
ous scleroderma and 55%–67% of patients with
limited cutaneous scleroderma. Visceral involve­
ment largely determines the prognosis. Esopha­
geal dysfunction is considered the most common
visceral complication, but lung involvement (eg,
lung fibrosis; nonspecific interstitial pneumonia
more common than usual interstitial pneumonia)
is the leading cause of death (30). As a result of
severe esophageal dysmotility, patients often go on
to develop severe reflux esophagitis, often compli­
cated by peptic strictures and Barrett esophagus.

system autoimmune disorder characterized by
small vessel vasculopathy, autoantibody produc­
tion, and dysfunctional fibroblastic deposition
of extracellular matrix resulting in multiorgan
fibrosis (29). Forms of systemic sclerosis include
limited cutaneous, diffuse cutaneous, and sys­
temic sclerosis without cutaneous involvement.
The limited cutaneous form is typically restricted
to the upper extremities and face and has the best
prognosis, while the diffuse cutaneous form is
rapidly progressive with widespread skin fibrosis
and increased internal organ involvement. Use of
the acronym CREST—calcinosis cutis, Raynaud
phenomenon, esophageal dysfunction, sclerodac­

1422  September-October 2019

radiographics.rsna.org

Table 3: Connective Tissue Disease with Esophageal and Cutaneous Manifestations

Connective Tissue
Disease

Systemic sclerosis

Imaging Findings

Skin Findings

Distal esophageal dilatation with patulous gas­

troesophageal junction (early)

Normal upper esophageal motility, atonic or
aperistaltic lower esophagus (lower two­
thirds), corresponding to smooth muscle

Reflux esophagitis: fold thickening, ulcers, stric­

tures (late)

Air esophagram at radiography

Firm, taut, shiny skin
Painful ulcers, particu­
larly when digits are
involved

Calcium deposition and
dyspigmentation may
occur

Telangiectases in face,

lips, and palms

Imaging
Differential
Diagnosis

Achalasia
Secondary
achalasia

Chagas

disease

The natural progression of systemic sclerosis

begins with early vascular damage and mono­
nuclear cell infiltrates, eventually progressing to
coarse thickened hypocellular collagen. Char­
acteristic cutaneous findings include firm, taut,
shiny skin. The skin may develop painful ulcers,
particularly when the digits are involved (Fig 17).
Skin findings typically start in the distal extremi­
ties with edema and subsequent hardening with
sclerodactyly and a taut shiny appearance. Cal­
cium deposition and dyspigmentation may occur.
Telangiectases may develop in the face, lips, and
palms (Fig 18).

The characteristic findings at esophagogra­
phy are dilatation of the distal esophagus with
normal upper esophageal motility and an atonic
or aperistaltic lower two­thirds of the esophagus,
corresponding to the portion lined by smooth
muscle (Fig 19). A patulous gastroesophageal
junction early in the disease course helps dif­
ferentiate systemic sclerosis from achalasia.
Findings of reflux esophagitis are often ob­
served, including mucosal granularity, thickened
folds, ulcers, and subsequent development of
strictures in patients with long­standing reflux
esophagitis. Another finding is an air esopha­
gram—demonstrable air within the intrathoracic
esophagus at conventional chest radiography—
best demonstrated in the distal esophagus on
lateral views (31).

Primary differential considerations for the
imaging findings in systemic sclerosis include
achalasia, secondary achalasia, and Chagas
disease, although the latter conditions are as­
sociated with tapered narrowing of the distal
esophagus rather than a gaping patulous distal
esophagus.

Inflammatory Diseases
Table 4 summarizes the salient imaging and cuta­
neous findings of inflammatory diseases affecting
the esophagus and skin.

Figure  17.  Systemic  sclerosis
in  a
58-year-old  woman.  Photograph  of  the
hand shows sclerodactyly with taut, shiny,
ulcerated skin.

Figure 18.  Systemic sclerosis in a 55-year-
old man. Photograph of the cheek shows
multiple facial telangiectases.

RG  •  Volume 39  Number 5

Lee et al  1423

of long­standing dysphagia before diagnosis of
lichen planus (38).

Characteristic cutaneous findings of lichen
planus are purple­violaceous pruritic papules.
The wrists are commonly involved, but any site
may be affected (Fig 20). Lichen planus may af­
fect nails and may cause scarring hair loss (lichen
planopilaris). Lichen planus may ulcerate primar­
ily or because it is pruritic and becomes excori­
ated (Fig 21). Biopsy of active lichen planus
shows characteristic bandlike lymphocytic inflam­
mation filling the superficial dermis in association
with epithelial dyskeratotic keratinocytes (Civatte
bodies). Treatment typically includes steroids,
other immunosuppressive agents, and endoscopic
esophageal dilation.

The characteristic finding of esophageal

involvement by lichen planus at esophagography
is a small­caliber esophagus involving the en­
tire thoracic esophagus with smooth narrowing
and tapered margins (Fig 22) (38). Segmental
esophageal strictures are less common. Strictures
tend to involve the proximal esophagus but can
occur anywhere in the esophagus and may vary in
number and length.

At esophagography, the small­caliber esopha­

gus of lichen planus may be indistinguishable
from that in eosinophilic esophagitis (39).
However, lichen planus typically occurs in
elderly women with long­standing dysphagia,
whereas eosinophilic esophagitis usually devel­
ops in young men with dysphagia. In addition,
eosinophilic esophagitis often has distinctive
concentric ringlike indentations associated with
the strictures, resulting in a “ringed” esophagus.
Therefore, familiarity with the differing clinical
manifestations of lichen planus and eosinophilic
esophagitis is important for timely recognition,
diagnosis, and treatment (35).

Crohn Disease
Crohn disease is an inflammatory bowel disease
of unknown cause that can affect any portion of
the gastrointestinal tract from mouth to anus. It
is characterized by discontinuous transmural in­
flammation of bowel with unpredictable relapsing
acute flares alternating with periods of quies­
cence. At histopathologic analysis, Crohn disease
is characterized by transmural inflammatory
cell infiltrates (eg, lymphocytes, plasma cells),
crypt irregularity, and nonnecrotizing granuloma
formation (Fig 23) (40). The terminal ileum and
colon are the most commonly involved portions
of the gastrointestinal tract.

Esophageal involvement is rare, and patients

with esophageal Crohn disease typically have
evidence of extraesophageal gastrointestinal in­
volvement before or concurrent with diagnosis of

Figure  19.  Systemic
sclerosis.  Upright  LPO
spot  fluoroscopic
im-
age  shows  a  markedly
dilated  atonic
lower
esophagus  and  a  patu-
lous  gastroesophageal
junction.

Lichen Planus
Lichen planus is a presumed autoimmune T­cell–
mediated inflammatory disorder affecting the
skin, oral and genital mucosa, esophagus, hair,
and nails. It is a chronic condition that predomi­
nantly affects middle­aged and older women and
tends to wax and wane over time. Lichen planus
has been associated with certain medications,
liver disease, and viral infections (eg, hepatitis C
virus), albeit of unclear cause (32). Squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) of the esophagus has rarely
been reported in patients with esophageal lichen
planus (33,34).

Although once thought to be rare, esophageal

lichen planus has been reported in more than
50% of patients with mucocutaneous lichen
planus and is historically underrecognized and
underreported (35,36). Patients with esophageal
lichen planus usually present with dysphagia
secondary to development of esophageal stric­
tures. Esophageal findings may precede cutane­
ous findings and may be the only manifestation
of the disease (37). Isolated esophageal involve­
ment in the absence of extraesophageal findings
has not uncommonly been reported as a cause

1424  September-October 2019

radiographics.rsna.org

Table 4: Inflammatory Diseases with Esophageal and Cutaneous Manifestations

Inflammatory
Disease

Imaging Findings

Skin Findings

Lichen planus Small­caliber esophagus

Purple­violaceous pruritic papules and

involving entire thoracic
esophagus with smooth nar­
rowing and tapered margins

plaques

Bullous and ulcerative forms less frequent
Wrists commonly involved, but any site may

Segmental esophageal stric­

be affected

tures less common

Nails and mucous membranes may be in­

Strictures tend to involve

volved

proximal esophagus but can
occur anywhere; may vary
in number and length

Crohn disease Punctate or slitlike ulcers with

surrounding mounds of
edema

Strictures, thickened folds,
larger ulcers, intramural
sinus tracks

Esophagoesophageal, esopha­
gogastric, and esophago­
bronchial fistulas

Lichen planopilaris: scarring hair loss

Disease­specific: perianal fissures and fistulas;
cobblestoning of oral mucosa in oral Crohn
disease; plaques, nodules, and ulcers in
“metastatic” (ie, cutaneous) Crohn disease

Reactive conditions: for example, erythema
nodosum and pyoderma gangrenosum
Associated conditions: for example, vitiligo,

palmar erythema, cutaneous manifestations
of nutritional deficiencies (eg, glossitis,
acrodermatitis enteropathica), and drug­ or
treatment­related conditions

Imaging Differen­
tial Diagnosis

Eosinophilic
esophagitis
(distinguished
by demograph­
ics and clinical
manifestation)
“Ringed” esopha­

gus favors
eosinophilic
esophagitis
Infectious esoph­
agitis (HSV,
CMV, HIV)
Reflux esopha­

gitis

Figure 20.  Lichen planus in a 43-year-old man.
Photograph shows characteristic violaceous pru-
ritic papules along the dorsal hand.

Figure  21.  Lichen  planus
in  a
45-year-old  woman.  Photograph  of
the  lower  extremity  shows  purple-vi-
olaceous  pruritic  plaques  with  associ-
ated ulcers and hair loss.

esophageal Crohn disease (41). The mid to distal
esophagus is most commonly involved. Patients
with esophageal Crohn disease typically have
symptoms of esophageal disease, such as odyno­
phagia, dysphagia, and chest pain (41,42).

Extraintestinal disease develops in up to 40%

of patients with Crohn disease (43). There are
numerous extraintestinal sites of disease, includ­
ing the eyes, skin, joints, biliary tree, lungs, and

kidneys. Cutaneous manifestations of Crohn
disease can be broadly categorized as follows:
(a) disease­specific lesions, which have similar
histopathologic features to the underlying inflam­
matory bowel disease (ie, noncaseating granu­
lomatous inflammation); (b) reactive inflamma­
tory lesions, which occur by specific pathologic

RG  •  Volume 39  Number 5

Lee et al  1425

Figure  23.  High-power  photomicrograph  shows  sarcoidal-
type granulomas in a perianal skin tag, consistent with “meta-
static” cutaneous Crohn disease.

Figure 24.  Metastatic cutaneous Crohn disease in a 67-year-
old man. Photograph of the perineal region shows edema and
ulceration.

mechanisms; and (c) associated cutaneous condi­
tions, which do not have a well­defined underly­
ing etiologic relationship but may be related to
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) linkage and/or
chronic inflammation (44,45).

Disease­specific cutaneous findings include
perianal fissures and fistulas; cobblestoning of the
oral mucosa in oral Crohn disease; and plaques,
nodules, and ulcers in “metastatic” (ie, cutane­
ous) Crohn disease, which involves cutaneous
lesions arising remote from the bowel (44,45).
Metastatic Crohn disease typically manifests after
initial diagnosis of Crohn disease in adults but
occurs more commonly at the time of diagnosis
in pediatric patients (46). Other examples of
metastatic Crohn disease include genital or peri­
neal lymphedema and lymphangioma (Fig 24).
Reactive conditions include erythema nodo­
sum and pyoderma gangrenosum. Associated
conditions include vitiligo, palmar erythema,
cutaneous manifestations of nutritional deficien­
cies (eg, glossitis, acrodermatitis enteropathica),
and drug­ or treatment­related conditions (44).

Figure  22.  Lichen  planus  in  a  60-year-
old  woman.  (a)  Right  anterior  oblique
(RAO)  spot  fluoroscopic  image  shows  a
small-caliber  esophagus  with  smoothly
marginated  narrowing  of  the  cervical
(arrowhead)  and  thoracic  (white  arrow)
esophagus.  There  is  also  an  anterior
web  at  the  pharyngoesophageal  junc-
tion  (black  arrow).  Unlike  in  eosinophilic
esophagitis, there are no associated con-
centric  rings.  (b)  Photograph  shows  a
white plaque along the right lateral aspect
of the tongue, consistent with oral muco-
sal involvement.

1426  September-October 2019

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  25.  Crohn  disease.  LPO  spot
fluoroscopic  image  shows  an  intramural
esophagoesophageal fistula involving the
distalmost esophagus (arrows).

Table 5: Genetic Diseases with Esophageal and Cutaneous Manifestations

Genetic Disease

Imaging Findings

Skin Findings

Imaging Differential Diagnosis

Cowden syn­
drome

Blue rubber
bleb nevus
syndrome
(BRBNS)

Glycogenic acanthosis: nod­
ular­appearing esophagus
with small, uniform, round
or oval, discrete mucosal
plaques/nodules

Rarely, small hamartomatous

polyps in esophagus

Multiple facial trichilemmomas

around eyes, nose, mouth, and
forehead are characteristic
Sclerotic fibromas, oral papil­

lomas (especially around the
lips), penile pigmentation,
and acral keratosis

Polypoid mucosal or submu­

Range from small blue, purple,

cosal masses

Sclerotic fibromas, oral pap­
illomas (especially around
lips), penile pigmentation,
and acral keratosis

or black compressible papules
to painful macular lesions or
large disfiguring tumors

Mucosa may be involved

Candida esophagitis
Reflux esophagitis
Artifacts (eg, air bubbles)

Other mucosal and submu­
cosal masses, including
leiomyomas, gastrointestinal
stromal tumors, fibromas or
neurofibromas, and dupli­
cation cysts

Treatment strategies include lifestyle modifica­
tions; medical management with anti­inflamma­
tory agents, steroids, or biologic medications; and
surgical management of obstruction or fistula.

The characteristic findings at esophagography
include punctate or slitlike ulcers with surround­
ing mounds of edema (representing aphthoid
ulcers), strictures, thickened folds, larger ulcers,
intramural sinus tracks, and esophagoesophageal
(Fig 25), esophagogastric, and esophagobronchial
fistulas (47). The primary differential consider­
ations for these imaging findings include infec­
tious esophagitis (HSV, CMV, and HIV esopha­
gitis) and reflux esophagitis. Esophageal Crohn
disease should be considered only in patients
with an established diagnosis of Crohn disease
elsewhere in the gastrointestinal tract.

Genetic Diseases
Table 5 summarizes the salient imaging and cu­
taneous findings of genetic diseases affecting the
esophagus and skin.

Cowden Syndrome
Cowden syndrome, also known as multiple ham­
artoma syndrome, is a rare autosomal­dominant
multisystem condition associated with a mutation
of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene and is the
most common of the PTEN hamartoma tumor
syndromes (48). Cowden syndrome is character­
ized by multiorgan hamartomas and an increased
risk of malignant tumors, particularly breast,
thyroid, and endometrial cancers.

Gastrointestinal manifestations include
various types of polyps involving the colon,

RG  •  Volume 39  Number 5

Lee et al  1427

Figure  26.  Cowden  syndrome  in  a  50-year-old  man.
(a)  Photograph  shows  multiple  flesh-colored  papules
around  the  nose,  consistent  with  facial  trichilemmomas.
(b)  LPO  spot  fluoroscopic  image  shows  numerous  small
nodules and plaques, consistent with glycogenic acantho-
sis. (c) Spot endoscopic image shows multiple round and
oval mucosal plaques, characteristic of glycogenic acantho-
sis.  (d)  Low-power  photomicrograph  shows  a  trichilem-
moma,  a  benign  dermal-based  tumor  of  the  hair  follicle
outer root sheath epithelium that is contiguous at multiple
points with the epidermis. Trichilemmomas are characteris-
tic of Cowden syndrome.

nal polyposis should strongly suggest Cowden
syndrome (52,53).

Cowden syndrome was once considered pri­
marily a dermatologic condition because muco­
cutaneous findings are present in nearly all cases.
Trichilemmomas, which are benign dermal­based
tumors derived from the outer root sheath hair
follicle, are the cutaneous tumor characteristic of
Cowden syndrome (54). Multiple facial trichi­
lemmomas around the eyes, nose, mouth, and
forehead are characteristic (Fig 26a). Additional
cutaneous manifestations include sclerotic fibro­
mas, oral papillomas (especially around the lips),

stomach, small intestine, and rarely esopha­
gus. Gastrointestinal polyps are observed in
up to 90% of patients at colonoscopy (49,50).
Cowden syndrome is associated with glycogenic
acanthosis of the esophagus (51). The combina­
tion of glycogenic acanthosis and gastrointesti­

1428  September-October 2019

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  27.  BRBNS.  Photograph  shows  characteristic
blue round papules on the plantar surface of the feet,
corresponding to subcutaneous venous malformations.

penile pigmentation, and acral keratoses (55).
Because skin findings may be seen during initial
manifestation of the disease and often predate
development of malignancy, early recognition is
important for appropriate risk assessment and
cancer screening (55).

The characteristic imaging feature associated
with Cowden syndrome at esophagography is gly­
cogenic acanthosis: a nodular­appearing esopha­
gus with small, uniform, round or oval, discrete
mucosal plaques or nodules (Fig 26b, 26c) (56).
The primary differential considerations for this
imaging finding include Candida esophagitis,
reflux esophagitis, and artifacts (eg, air bubbles).
Rarely, esophagography may reveal numerous
small hamartomatous polyps in the esophagus.

Blue Rubber Bleb Nevus Syndrome
Blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome (BRBNS)
is a rare congenital syndrome characterized by
venous malformations of the skin, gastrointestinal
tract, and soft tissues but can involve other or­
gans. Gastrointestinal involvement is considered
pathognomonic (57). Most cases are sporadic (ie,
noninherited) and are the result of somatic muta­
tions in the TEK gene, which encodes the endo­
thelial cell tyrosine kinase receptor TIE2 (57).
Cutaneous, gastrointestinal, and musculoskeletal
venous malformations are the most common
manifestations of the disease.

Cutaneous lesions (venous malformations) are

typically present at birth and range from small
blue, purple, or black compressible papules (Fig
27) to painful macular lesions or even large disfig­
uring tumors (45). The mucosa may be involved.

Gastrointestinal lesions may become apparent

later and commonly involve the small intestine
and colon, although any portion of the gastro­
intestinal tract can be involved (58). Venous

Figure  28.  BRBNS.  LPO  spot  fluoro-
scopic  image  shows  a  submucosal  mass
(arrows)  with  obtuse  margins,  corre-
sponding to a large venous malformation.

malformations of the gastrointestinal tract
frequently bleed and tend to result in chronic
iron­deficiency anemia (rather than acute hemor­
rhage), necessitating repeated transfusions (45).
Localized mass effect on adjacent structures,
intussusception, or volvulus may rarely occur
(59). Gastrointestinal lesions may be treated with
banding, sclerotherapy, or surgical excision.

Polypoid mucosal or submucosal masses with

obtuse margins may be seen at esophagogra­
phy (Fig 28). The primary imaging differential
considerations are other mucosal and submucosal
masses, including leiomyomas, gastrointestinal
stromal tumors, fibromas, neurofibromas, and
duplication cysts.

Malignancies

Table 6 summarizes the salient imaging and
cutaneous findings of malignancies affecting the
esophagus and skin.

Melanoma
Melanoma is an aggressive malignant tumor of
melanocytes. Primary melanoma of the esopha­

RG  •  Volume 39  Number 5

Lee et al  1429

Table 6: Malignancies with Esophageal and Cutaneous Manifestations

Malignancy

Melanoma

Imaging Findings

Skin Findings

Bulky polypoid intralumi­
nal mass that expands
lumen without causing
obstruction

ABCDEs of melanoma: asymmetry,
border irregularity, color variation,
diameter (>6 mm), and evolution (ie,
change)

Imaging Differential
Diagnosis

Lymphoma
Spindle cell carcinoma

Acrokeratosis

Findings of SCC of

Pruritic and painful erythematous

Other malignant

paraneoplastica

esophagus: infiltrating
lesion with irregular
luminal narrowing and
shouldered margins
Polypoid, ulcerative, or

varicoid lesions may also
be seen

hyperkeratotic plaques involving acral
surfaces: hands, feet, nose, and ears

Varying appearances—ill­defined

lesions, well­defined lesions, and scal­
ing and erythema—which correspond
to clinical stages and evolution of
underlying malignancy

esophageal masses

who already have multiorgan involvement. Not
surprisingly, differentiation of primary and meta­
static esophageal melanoma primarily relies on
a combination of clinical history (eg, established
diagnosis of melanoma elsewhere) and histo­
pathologic findings (eg, in situ melanoma, radial
growth phase, melanocytosis) (61). Treatment
strategies for primary and metastatic esopha­
geal melanoma are predominantly palliative and
include surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy,
or combination therapy.

Cutaneous melanoma subtypes include superfi­
cial spreading, nodular, lentigo maligna, desmoplas­
tic, and acral lentiginous melanoma. The basic cuta­
neous features of a lesion worrisome for melanoma,
the so­called ABCDEs of melanoma, are asymme­
try, border irregularity, color variation, diameter (>6
mm), and evolution (ie, change) (Fig 29).

Both esophagography and CT may reveal a
bulky polypoid intraluminal mass that typically
expands and dilates the lumen without causing
obstruction (Fig 30) (64). Differential consider­
ations for these imaging findings include lym­
phoma and spindle cell carcinoma of the esopha­
gus, which may produce identical findings.

Acrokeratosis Paraneoplastica
Acrokeratosis paraneoplastica is a rare paraneo­
plastic syndrome, one of two conditions known as
Bazex syndrome, which was described in 1965 as
a specific cutaneous marker of underlying malig­
nancy involving the aerodigestive tract. It is most
commonly associated with SCCs, including SCC
of the esophagus (54,65). Acrokeratosis paraneo­
plastica is characterized by pruritic and painful
erythematous hyperkeratotic plaques involving
the acral surfaces, specifically the hands, feet,
nose, and ears (Fig 31).

Although largely limited to case reports, vari­
able clinical manifestations have been described

Figure  29.  Cutaneous  melanoma  in  a
71-year-old  man.  Photograph  shows  an
asymmetric,  raised,  pigmented-multicol-
ored skin lesion with irregular borders and
crusting.

gus is rare, accounting for only 0.1%–0.2% of
esophageal malignancies and 0.5% of noncutane­
ous melanomas (60,61). This rarity is attributed
to the fact that the esophagus typically lacks
melanoblasts—the precursors to melanocytes.
The presence of melanocytes in the esophagus
is postulated to be the result of aberrant migra­
tion during embryogenesis (61). Extraesophageal
melanoma metastasizing to the esophagus is even
rarer, accounting for only 4%–5% of melanoma
metastases to the gastrointestinal tract, with the
small intestine being the most common site of
gastrointestinal metastases (~70%) (62,63).

The prognosis is dismal for primary esopha­
geal melanoma and even worse for metastatic
esophageal melanoma (61). This is partly because
metastases to the esophagus are thought to be
a relatively late finding in the course of meta­
static melanoma, typically occurring in patients

1430  September-October 2019

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  30.  Primary  esophageal  melanoma.  (a)  Coronal
contrast-enhanced  CT  image  shows  an  ulcerated  distal
esophageal  mass  (arrow)  that  extends  across  the  gastro-
esophageal  junction  into  the  gastric  cardia.  (b)  Coronal
PET/CT  image  shows  increased  metabolic  activity  corre-
sponding  to  the  distal  esophageal  mass.  (c)  Spot  endo-
scopic image shows an ulcerated mass in the distal esopha-
gus, which corresponds to the mass seen at CT.

including ill­defined lesions, well­defined lesions,
and scaling and erythema. These cutaneous
features reflect the clinical stages and evolu­
tion of the underlying malignancy. For example,
ill­defined lesions typically correlate with asymp­
tomatic primary disease, whereas scaling and
erythema are usually seen with systemic symp­
toms and progressive or metastatic disease. Not
surprisingly, cutaneous findings presage occult
malignancy in up to 67% of patients (66,67).

Because it is a paraneoplastic syndrome, skin
findings typically improve with treatment of the
underlying neoplasm, remain with persistent
disease, and reappear with recurrent disease (66).
Histologic characteristics vary from nonspe­
cific to psoriasiform epidermal hyperplasia with
hyperkeratosis and parakeratosis associated with
superficial perivascular lymphocytic inflammation
and limited neutrophils (66). Direct immunoflu­
orescence may be positive for linear IgG (immu­
noglobulin G) and complement component C3
along the basement membrane zone.

SCC of the esophagus is the dominant his­
tologic type of primary esophageal carcinoma
worldwide (68) and the second most common
type (~40%) of esophageal carcinoma after
adenocarcinoma in the United States. Patients
are typically asymptomatic early in the course of
the disease but develop dysphagia (solids first),
odynophagia, anorexia, and weight loss with
more advanced disease. Major risk factors in­
clude tobacco and alcohol use, which likely have
a synergistic effect on cancer risk. SCC typically
involves the upper or mid esophagus (69).

At esophagography, early findings of SCC
of the esophagus include plaque­like lesions,

sessile polyps, or focal irregularity of the wall
(5). Characteristic findings of advanced SCC
include an infiltrating mass with irregular lu­
minal narrowing and shouldered margins (69).
Polypoid, ulcerative, or varicoid lesions may also
be observed (70). CT may show eccentric mural
thickening or a focal mass involving the esopha­
gus (Fig 32). Differential considerations for
these findings primarily include other malignant
esophageal tumors.

Drug-induced Conditions

Table 7 summarizes the salient imaging and
cutaneous findings of drug­related disease (eg,
doxycycline esophagitis) affecting the esophagus
and skin.

Doxycycline Esophagitis
Various medications can adversely affect the
esophagus by direct esophageal injury or second­
ary injury related to drug­related gastroesopha­
geal reflux or impaired motility (71). Drug­in­
duced esophagitis typically represents a localized
inflammatory process in response to medication
ingestion. Direct esophageal injury and esopha­
gitis result from local esophageal mucosal injury
when medication contacts and reacts with the

RG  •  Volume 39  Number 5

Lee et al  1431

Figure  31.  Acrokeratosis  paraneoplas-
tica  secondary  to  SCC  of  the  lung  in  a
66-year-old man. Photograph of the foot
shows painful, pruritic, scaly keratoderma.

Figure  32.  SCC  of  the  esophagus  in  a  63-year-old
woman with hoarseness and a painful, itchy, scaly rash
on  the  hands,  feet,  and  ears.  Axial  contrast-enhanced
CT  image  shows  asymmetric  mural  thickening  and  a
mass (arrows) in the posterior esophagus.

Table 7: Drug-induced Conditions with Esophageal and Cutaneous Manifestations

Drug­induced Condition

Imaging Findings

Skin Findings

Doxycycline esophagitis

Multiple small shallow ulcers
in midesophagus, typically
at areas of extrinsic com­
pression and relative stasis
(aortic arch, left main
bronchus, or left atrium),
with normal background
mucosa

Phototoxic skin eruptions
on sun­exposed skin
and photo­onycholysis,
which is characterized
by separation of the nail
from its nail bed

Imaging Differential
Diagnosis

HSV esophagitis

adjacent esophageal mucosa, typically at areas of
extrinsic compression in the midesophagus by
the aortic arch, left main bronchus, or left atrium,
which represent relative points of stasis (72).

Tetracycline and doxycycline (a tetracycline

derivative) are the most common causes of
drug­induced esophagitis in the United States
and typically cause superficial ulceration without
associated scarring or strictures (73,74). Other
drugs associated with drug­induced esophagitis
that may cause severe esophageal injury with as­
sociated strictures include quinidine, potassium
chloride, nonsteroidal anti­inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) (eg, aspirin, ibuprofen), and alendro­
nate (72,74–76). Therapeutic approaches include
discontinuing the offending agent, symptom
treatment, and managing the complications of

drug­induced esophagitis (eg, endoscopic balloon
dilation for strictures).

Patients with drug­induced esophagitis may
present with dysphagia, odynophagia, or nonspe­
cific chest pain. Some medications may be associ­
ated with unique cutaneous manifestations. An
example is phototoxic reactions associated with
doxycycline, which is a common antimalarial medi­
cation (77). Specific phototoxic reactions associated
with doxycycline include phototoxic skin eruptions
(Fig 33), which have a characteristic distribution
on sun­exposed skin resembling a sunburn, and
photo­onycholysis (Fig 34), which is characterized
by separation of the nail from its nail bed.

Characteristic features at esophagography
depend on the offending agent. Tetracycline and
doxycycline typically result in development of

1432  September-October 2019

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  33.  Phototoxic  reaction  in  a  33-year-old  man
treated with doxycycline. Photograph of the back shows
skin erythema, typical of a phototoxic skin eruption.

single or multiple small shallow ulcers in the mid­
esophagus on normal background mucosa (Fig 35).
Large ulcers and segmental or concentric narrow­
ing and strictures may be observed in more severe
forms of esophageal injury associated with quini­
dine, potassium chloride, NSAIDs, and alendronate
(74,78). The primary differential consideration for
shallow ulcers seen with tetracycline and doxycy­
cline use is herpes esophagitis.

Conclusion

A diverse group of conditions can affect the
esophagus and skin. The esophageal and cutane­
ous manifestations of disease may directly reflect
the underlying disease process, as in patients
with bullous diseases and systemic sclerosis, or
may represent a condition intimately associated
with but distinct from the underlying disease,
as in patients with acrokeratosis paraneoplastica
and SCC, in which the cutaneous findings are a
marker for underlying malignancy. Crohn disease
is a representative condition with cutaneous
manifestations that can reflect the same underly­
ing disease affecting the gastrointestinal tract or
reactive or associated conditions distinct from the
underlying inflammatory process.

Clinical manifestations of esophageal and
cutaneous disease may occur independent of or
concurrent with one another. When no specific
cutaneous findings are present, familiarity with
characteristic imaging findings can help distin­
guish esophageal opportunistic infections such as
herpes or Candida esophagitis, enabling appropri­
ate treatment without the need for endoscopy.
Even when the diagnosis is readily established on
the basis of the cutaneous findings, as in patients

Figure  34.  Phototoxic  reaction  in  a  45-year-old  woman.
Photograph of the left ring finger shows doxycycline-induced
photo-onycholysis, a rare phototoxic reaction triggered by ul-
traviolet B radiation that results in separation of the distal nail
from the underlying nail bed.

Figure  35.  Doxycy-
cline-induced  esopha-
gitis. Upright LPO spot
fluoroscopic  image  at
the  level  of  the  aortic
arch  shows  an  irregu-
lar ulcer (arrows) in the
midesophagus  at  the
level of the carina, with
mild  segmental  nar-
rowing at that level.

with bullous diseases such as EB and MMP,
imaging (ie, double­contrast esophagography)
is important for assessing the complications of
coexisting esophageal disease, such as strictures,
in a noninvasive way.

Familiarity with characteristic cutaneous find­
ings can help establish a diagnosis in the setting
of nonspecific esophageal imaging findings, as in

RG  •  Volume 39  Number 5

Lee et al  1433

patients with Cowden syndrome and glycogenic
acanthosis, for which early recognition is impor­
tant for appropriate risk assessment and cancer
screening. Similarly, characteristic esophageal
imaging findings can help establish a diagnosis in
the absence of specific cutaneous findings, as in
patients with lichen planus, in which the esopha­
geal manifestations of disease may precede the
cutaneous manifestations.

This article reviews representative conditions

that affect the esophagus and skin and demon­
strates how familiarity with these entities and
their characteristic cutaneous manifestations
helps inform what may at times be nonspecific
esophageal imaging findings and vice versa. Rec­
ognition and understanding of these entities and
the potential associations between esophageal
imaging findings and characteristic cutaneous
lesions are of use to both interpreting radiologists
and referring clinicians to help establish the cor­
rect diagnosis and guide appropriate workup and
management of these patients.

Disclosures of Conflicts of Interest.—M.G.L. Activities related
to  the  present  article:  disclosed  no  relevant  relationships.  Ac-
tivities not related to the present article: grants from Philips and
Ethicon.  Other  activities:  disclosed  no  relevant  relationships.
M.A.H. Activities related to the present article: disclosed no rel­
evant  relationships.  Activities  not  related  to  the  present  article:
board member for and stockholder in Accure Medical. Other
activities: disclosed no relevant relationships. M.S.L. Activities
related to the present article: disclosed no relevant relationships.
Activities not related to the present article: paid lecturer for Inter­
national Diagnostics Course Davos; royalties from Elsevier and
Cambridge  Press.  Other  activities:  disclosed  no  relevant  rela­
tionships. P.J.P. Activities related to the present article: disclosed
no relevant relationships. Activities not related to the present arti-
cle: consultant for Bracco; stockholder in SHINE, Elucent, and
Cellectar.  Other  activities:  disclosed  no  relevant  relationships.

References
  1.  Buss DH, Scharyj M. Herpesvirus infection of the esophagus
and other visceral organs in adults: incidence and clinical
significance. Am J Med 1979;66(3):457–462.

  2.  Levine MS, Laufer I, Kressel HY, Friedman HM. Herpes
esophagitis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1981;136(5):863–866.
  3.  Ramanathan J, Rammouni M, Baran J Jr, Khatib R. Herpes
simplex virus esophagitis in the immunocompetent host: an
overview. Am J Gastroenterol 2000;95(9):2171–2176.
  4.  Shortsleeve MJ, Levine MS. Herpes esophagitis in otherwise
healthy patients: clinical and radiographic findings. Radiol­
ogy 1992;182(3):859–861.

  5.  Levine MS, Rubesin SE. Diseases of the esophagus: diagnosis
with esophagography. Radiology 2005;237(2):414–427.

  6.  Bate SL, Dollard SC, Cannon MJ. Cytomegalovirus sero­
prevalence in the United States: the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Surveys, 1988­2004. Clin Infect Dis
2010;50(11):1439–1447.

  7.  Levine MS. Radiology of esophagitis: a pattern approach.

Radiology 1991;179(1):1–7.

  8.  Krishnam MS, Suh RD, Tomasian A, et al. Postoperative
complications of lung transplantation: radiologic findings
along  a  time  continuum.  RadioGraphics  2007;27(4):
957–974.

  9.  Balthazar EJ, Megibow AJ, Hulnick D, Cho KC, Beran­
baum  E.  Cytomegalovirus  esophagitis  in  AIDS:  radio­
graphic  features  in  16  patients.  AJR  Am  J  Roentgenol
1987;149(5):919–923.

10.  Wilcox CM, Diehl DL, Cello JP, Margaretten W, Jacobson
MA. Cytomegalovirus esophagitis in patients with AIDS: a
clinical, endoscopic, and pathologic correlation. Ann Intern
Med 1990;113(8):589–593.

11.  Gefter WB, Laufer I, Edell S, Gohel VK. Candidiasis in
the obstructed esophagus. Radiology 1981;138(1):25–28.
12.  Sam JW, Levine MS, Rubesin SE, Laufer I. The “foamy”
esophagus: a radiographic sign of Candida esophagitis. AJR
Am J Roentgenol 2000;174(4):999–1002.

13.  Levine  MS,  Macones  AJ  Jr,  Laufer  I.  Candida  esopha­
gitis:  accuracy  of  radiographic  diagnosis.  Radiology
1985;154(3):581–587.

14.  Vahey TN, Maglinte DD, Chernish SM. State­of­the­art
barium examination in opportunistic esophagitis. Dig Dis
Sci 1986;31(11):1192–1195.

15.  Wilcox CM. Esophageal disease in the acquired immuno­
deficiency syndrome: etiology, diagnosis, and management.
Am J Med 1992;92(4):412–421.

16.  Levine  MS,  Woldenberg  R,  Herlinger  H,  Laufer  I.  Op­
portunistic  esophagitis  in  AIDS:  radiographic  diagnosis.
Radiology 1987;165(3):815–820.

17.  Hayes BB, Hille RC, Goldberg LJ. Eosinophilic folliculitis in 2
HIV­positive women. Arch Dermatol 2004;140(4):463–465.
18.  Fine JD, Eady RA, Bauer EA, et al. The classification of
inherited epidermolysis bullosa (EB): report of the Third
International Consensus Meeting on Diagnosis and Clas­
sification of EB. J Am Acad Dermatol 2008;58(6):931–950.
19.  Dang N, Murrell DF. Mutation analysis and characterization
of COL7A1 mutations in dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa.
Exp Dermatol 2008;17(7):553–568.

20.  Mauro MA, Parker LA, Hartley WS, Renner JB, Mauro
PM.  Epidermolysis  bullosa:  radiographic  findings  in  16
cases. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1987;149(5):925–927.
21.  Guerra­Leal JD, Meester I, Cantu­Gonzalez JR, Ornelas­
Cortinas G, Montemayor­Martinez A, Salas­Alanis JC. The
importance  of  esophagography  in  patients  with  recessive
dystrophic  epidermolysis  bullosa.  AJR  Am  J  Roentgenol
2016;207(4):778–781.

22.  Travis SP, McGrath JA, Turnbull AJ, et al. Oral and gas­
trointestinal manifestations of epidermolysis bullosa. Lancet
1992;340(8834­8835):1505–1506.

23.  Chan LS. Mucous membrane pemphigoid. Clin Dermatol

2001;19(6):703–711.

24.  Dunnick NR. Image Interpretation Session: 1999—benign
mucous membrane pemphigoid (cicatricial pemphigoid).
RadioGraphics 2000;20(1):268–269.

25.  Syn WK, Ahmed MM. Esophageal involvement in cicatri­
cial pemphigoid: a rare cause of dysphagia. Dis Esophagus
2004;17(2):180–182.

26.  Chan LS, Ahmed AR, Anhalt GJ, et al. The First Inter­
national Consensus on Mucous Membrane Pemphigoid:
definition,  diagnostic  criteria,  pathogenic  factors,  medi­
cal  treatment,  and  prognostic  indicators.  Arch  Dermatol
2002;138(3):370–379.

27.  Al­Kutoubi  MA,  Eliot  C.  Oesophageal  involvement  in
benign  mucous  membrane  pemphigoid.  Clin  Radiol
1984;35(2):131–135.

28.  Naylor MF, MacCarty RL, Rogers RS 3rd. Barium stud­
ies in esophageal cicatricial pemphigoid. Abdom Imaging
1995;20(2):97–100.

29.  van  den  Hoogen  F,  Khanna  D,  Fransen  J,  et  al.  2013
Classification  Criteria  for  Systemic  Sclerosis:  an  Ameri­
can  College  of  Rheumatology/European  League  against
Rheumatism  collaborative  initiative.  Arthritis  Rheum
2013;65(11):2737–2747.

30.  Gabrielli  A,  Avvedimento  EV,  Krieg  T.  Scleroderma.  N

Engl J Med 2009;360(19):1989–2003.

31.  Dinsmore RE, Goodman D, Dreyfuss JR. The air esopha­
gram: a sign of scleroderma involving the esophagus. Radiol­
ogy 1966;87(2):348–349, passim.

32.  Shengyuan L, Songpo Y, Wen W, Wenjing T, Haitao Z,
Binyou W. Hepatitis C virus and lichen planus: a reciprocal
association determined by a meta­analysis. Arch Dermatol
2009;145(9):1040–1047.

33.  Chryssostalis A, Gaudric M, Terris B, Coriat R, Prat F,
Chaussade S. Esophageal lichen planus: a series of eight cases

1434  September-October 2019

radiographics.rsna.org

including a patient with esophageal verrucous carcinoma—a
case series. Endoscopy 2008;40(9):764–768.

34.  Calabrese  C,  Fabbri  A,  Benni  M,  et  al.  Squamous  cell
carcinoma arising in esophageal lichen planus. Gastrointest
Endosc 2003;57(4):596–599.

35.  Kern JS, Technau­Hafsi K, Schwacha H, et al. Esophageal
involvement is frequent in lichen planus: study in 32 patients
with  suggestion  of  clinicopathologic  diagnostic  criteria
and therapeutic implications. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
2016;28(12):1374–1382.

36.  Fox LP, Lightdale CJ, Grossman ME. Lichen planus of the
esophagus: what dermatologists need to know. J Am Acad
Dermatol 2011;65(1):175–183.

37.  Katzka DA, Smyrk TC, Bruce AJ, Romero Y, Alexander
JA, Murray JA. Variations in presentations of esophageal
involvement in lichen planus. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol
2010;8(9):777–782.

38.  Rauschecker AM, Levine MS, Whitson MJ, et al. Esophageal
lichen  planus:  clinical  and  radiographic  findings  in  eight
patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2017;208(1):101–106.
39.  White SB, Levine MS, Rubesin SE, Spencer GS, Katzka
DA, Laufer I. The small­caliber esophagus: radiographic
sign  of  idiopathic  eosinophilic  esophagitis.  Radiology
2010;256(1):127–134.

40.  Baumgart  DC,  Sandborn  WJ.  Crohn’s  disease.  Lancet

2012;380(9853):1590–1605.

41.  De Felice KM, Katzka DA, Raffals LE. Crohn’s disease of
the esophagus: clinical features and treatment outcomes in
the biologic era. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2015;21(9):2106–2113.
42.  Decker GA, Loftus EV Jr, Pasha TM, Tremaine WJ, Sand­
born WJ. Crohn’s disease of the esophagus: clinical features
and outcomes. Inflamm Bowel Dis 2001;7(2):113–119.
43.  Kethu SR. Extraintestinal manifestations of inflammatory
bowel diseases. J Clin Gastroenterol 2006;40(6):467–475.
44.  Kurtzman DJ, Jones T, Lian F, Peng LS. Metastatic Crohn’s
disease: a review and approach to therapy. J Am Acad Der­
matol 2014;71(4):804–813.

45.  Thrash  B,  Patel  M,  Shah  KR,  Boland  CR,  Menter  A.
Cutaneous manifestations of gastrointestinal disease: part
II. J Am Acad Dermatol 2013;68(2):211.e1–211.e33; quiz
244–246.

46.  Hagen  JW,  Swoger  JM,  Grandinetti  LM.  Cutaneous
manifestations of Crohn disease. Dermatol Clin 2015;33(3):
417–431.

47.  Gohel  V,  Long  BW,  Richter  G.  Aphthous  ulcers  in  the
esophagus  with  Crohn  colitis.  AJR  Am  J  Roentgenol
1981;137(4):872–873.

48.  Pilarski  R,  Burt  R,  Kohlman  W,  Pho  L,  Shannon  KM,
Swisher E. Cowden syndrome and the PTEN hamartoma
tumor syndrome: systematic review and revised diagnostic
criteria. J Natl Cancer Inst 2013;105(21):1607–1616.
49.  Heald B, Mester J, Rybicki L, Orloff MS, Burke CA, Eng
C. Frequent gastrointestinal polyps and colorectal adenocar­
cinomas in a prospective series of PTEN mutation carriers.
Gastroenterology 2010;139(6):1927–1933.

50.  Stanich PP, Owens VL, Sweetser S, et al. Colonic polypo­
sis and neoplasia in Cowden syndrome. Mayo Clin Proc
2011;86(6):489–492.

51.  Kay PS, Soetikno RM, Mindelzun R, Young HS. Diffuse
esophageal glycogenic acanthosis: an endoscopic marker of
Cowden’s disease. Am J Gastroenterol 1997;92(6):1038–
1040.

52.  McGarrity TJ, Wagner Baker MJ, Ruggiero FM, et al. GI
polyposis and glycogenic acanthosis of the esophagus associ­
ated with PTEN mutation positive Cowden syndrome in the
absence of cutaneous manifestations. Am J Gastroenterol
2003;98(6):1429–1434.

53.  Levi Z, Baris HN, Kedar I, et al. Upper and lower gastro­
intestinal  findings  in  PTEN  mutation­positive  Cowden
syndrome  patients  participating  in  an  active  surveillance
program. Clin Transl Gastroenterol 2011;2(11):e5.
54.  Shah KR, Boland CR, Patel M, Thrash B, Menter A. Cu­
taneous manifestations of gastrointestinal disease: part I. J
Am Acad Dermatol 2013;68(2):189.e1–189.e21; quiz 210.

55.  Lopes  S,  Vide  J,  Moreira  E,  Azevedo  F.  Cowden  syn­
drome: clinical case and a brief review. Dermatol Online J
2017;23(8):13030/qt0023k3x0.

56.  Berliner L, Redmond P, Horowitz L, Ruoff M. Glycogen
plaques (glycogenic acanthosis) of the esophagus. Radiology
1981;141(3):607–610.

57.  Soblet J, Kangas J, Nätynki M, et al. Blue rubber bleb ne­
vus (BRBN) syndrome is caused by somatic TEK (TIE2)
mutations. J Invest Dermatol 2017;137(1):207–216.
58.  Fishman  SJ,  Smithers  CJ,  Folkman  J,  et  al.  Blue  rubber
bleb nevus syndrome: surgical eradication of gastrointestinal
bleeding. Ann Surg 2005;241(3):523–528.

59.  Beluffi  G,  Romano  P,  Matteotti  C,  Minniti  S,  Ceffa  F,
Morbini  P.  Jejunal  intussusception  in  a  10­year­old  boy
with  blue  rubber  bleb  nevus  syndrome.  Pediatr  Radiol
2004;34(9):742–745.

60.  Brown JH, Chew FS. Primary esophageal melanoma. AJR

Am J Roentgenol 1991;157(2):318.

61.  Sanchez AA, Wu TT, Prieto VG, Rashid A, Hamilton SR,
Wang H. Comparison of primary and metastatic malignant
melanoma of the esophagus: clinicopathologic review of 10
cases. Arch Pathol Lab Med 2008;132(10):1623–1629.
62.  Dasgupta TK, Brasfield RD. Metastatic melanoma of the
gastrointestinal tract. Arch Surg 1964;88(6):969–973.
63.  Caputy  GG,  Donohue  JH,  Goellner  JR,  Weaver  AL.
Metastatic melanoma of the gastrointestinal tract: results of
surgical management. Arch Surg 1991;126(11):1353–1358.
64.  Yoo CC, Levine MS, McLarney JK, Lowry MA. Primary
malignant melanoma of the esophagus: radiographic findings
in seven patients. Radiology 1998;209(2):455–459.

65.  Viteri A, Muñoz A, Barcelò R. Acrokeratosis paraneoplastica
(Bazex  syndrome)  preceding  the  diagnosis  of  metastatic
squamous  cell  carcinoma  of  the  esophagus.  J  Am  Acad
Dermatol 2005;52(4):711–712.

66.  Bolognia JL. Bazex syndrome: acrokeratosis paraneoplastica.

Semin Dermatol 1995;14(2):84–89.

67.  Sharma  V,  Sharma  NL,  Ranjan  N,  Tegta  GR,  Sarin  S.
Acrokeratosis paraneoplastica (Bazex syndrome): case report
and review of literature. Dermatol Online J 2006;12(1):11.
68.  Pennathur A, Gibson MK, Jobe BA, Luketich JD. Oesopha­

geal carcinoma. Lancet 2013;381(9864):400–412.

69.  Lewis RB, Mehrotra AK, Rodriguez P, Levine MS. From
the  Radiologic  Pathology  Archives:  esophageal  neo­
plasms—radiologic­pathologic correlation. RadioGraphics
2013;33(4):1083–1108.

70.  Iyer RB, Silverman PM, Tamm EP, Dunnington JS, Du­
Brow RA. Diagnosis, staging, and follow­up of esophageal
cancer. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2003;181(3):785–793.
71.  Tutuian R; Clinical Lead Outpatient Services and Gastro­
intestinal  Function  Laboratory.  Adverse  effects  of  drugs
on  the  esophagus.  Best  Pract  Res  Clin  Gastroenterol
2010;24(2):91–97.

72.  Levine MS, Rubesin SE, Laufer I. Barium esophagogra­
phy:  a  study  for  all  seasons.  Clin  Gastroenterol  Hepatol
2008;6(1):11–25.

73.  Luedtke P, Levine MS, Rubesin SE, Weinstein DS, Laufer
I. Radiologic diagnosis of benign esophageal strictures: a
pattern approach. RadioGraphics 2003;23(4):897–909.
74.  Ryan JM, Kelsey P, Ryan BM, Mueller PR. Alendronate­
induced esophagitis: case report of a recently recognized form
of severe esophagitis with esophageal stricture—radiographic
features. Radiology 1998;206(2):389–391.

75.  Bonavina L, DeMeester TR, McChesney L, Schwizer W,
Albertucci M, Bailey RT. Drug­induced esophageal stric­
tures. Ann Surg 1987;206(2):173–183.

76.  Levine MS, Borislow SM, Rubesin SE, O’Brien C. Esopha­
geal stricture caused by a Motrin tablet (ibuprofen). Abdom
Imaging 1994;19(1):6–7.

77.  Goetze S, Hiernickel C, Elsner P. Phototoxicity of doxy­
cycline: a systematic review on clinical manifestations, fre­
quency, cofactors, and prevention. Skin Pharmacol Physiol
2017;30(2):76–80.

78.  Teplick JG, Teplick SK, Ominsky SH, Haskin ME. Esophagi­
tis caused by oral medication. Radiology 1980;134(1):23–25.

This journal-based SA-CME activity has been approved for AMA PRA Category 1 CreditTM. See rsna.org/learning-center-rg.

