This copy is for personal use only. To order printed copies, contact reprints@rsna.org

71

Imaging of Drug-induced Com-
plications in the Gastrointestinal
System1

Drug-induced injury commonly affects the gastrointestinal and
hepatobiliary systems because of the mechanisms of absorption and
metabolism. In pill esophagitis, injury is frequently related to direct
contact with the esophageal mucosa, resulting in small superficial
ulcers in the mid esophagus. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
can lead to gastrointestinal tract ulcers and small bowel mucosal
diaphragms (thin weblike strictures). Injury to the pancreatic and
hepatobiliary systems can manifest as pancreatitis, acute or chronic
hepatitis, cholestasis, or steatosis and steatohepatitis (which may
progress to cirrhosis). Various drugs may also insult the hepatic
vasculature, resulting in Budd-Chiari and sinusoidal obstructive
syndromes. Focal lesions such as hepatic adenomas may develop af-
ter use of oral contraceptives or anabolic steroids. Ultrasonography,
computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging can aid
in diagnosis of drug-induced injuries and often are necessary to ex-
clude other causes.

©RSNA, 2015 • radiographics.rsna.org

Introduction
The growth of various medical therapies has led to an increased fre-
quency of medication side effects (1,2). Traditionally, most drug-in-
duced side effects were diagnosed clinically according to the patient’s
presenting symptoms and signs and history of medication use. How-
ever, as imaging is used more and more commonly, many of these
complications are initially diagnosed at imaging instead of at clinical
presentation. Therefore, it is important for radiologists to recognize
the imaging appearance of common drug-induced complications and
to include drug-induced injury in the differential diagnosis.

Melissa J. McGettigan, MD
Christine O. Menias, MD
Zhenqiang J. Gao, MD
Vincent M. Mellnick, MD
Amy K. Hara, MD

Abbreviations: ACE = angiotensin-converting
enzyme,  EGD  =  esophagogastroduodenoscopy,
HCA  =  hepatocellular  adenoma,  HNF  =  he-
patocyte nuclear factor, NSAID = nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory  drug,  SOS  =  sinusoidal  ob-
struction syndrome

RadioGraphics 2016; 36:71–87

Published online 10.1148/rg.2016150132

Content Codes:

1From
the  Departments  of  Radiology
(M.J.M.)  and  Pathology  (Z.J.G.),  Southern
Illinois  University  School  of  Medicine,  701
N  First  St,  Springfield,  IL  62781;  Depart-
ment  of  Radiology,  Mayo  Clinic,  Scottsdale,
Ariz  (C.O.M.,  A.K.H.);  and  Department  of
Radiology,  Mallinckrodt  Institute  of  Radiol-
ogy, Washington  University  School  of  Medi-
cine,  St  Louis,  Mo  (V.M.M.).  Presented  as
an  education  exhibit  at  the  2014  RSNA An-
nual  Meeting.  Received  April  24,  2015;  re-
vision  requested  June  18  and  received  July
16;  accepted  July  23.  For  this  journal-based
SA-CME  activity,  the  authors,  editor,  and
reviewers have disclosed no relevant relation-
ships.  Address  correspondence  to  M.J.M.
(e-mail: melissamcgettiga@hotmail.com).

©RSNA, 2015

SA-CME LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After completing this journal-based SA-CME
activity, participants will be able to:

 ■ Describe the imaging features of
NSAID-induced injuries in the gastroin-
testinal tract and how they relate to vari-
ous drugs’ mechanisms of action.

 ■ Identify typical patterns of drug-
induced injury in the bowel, provide a
differential diagnosis, and describe the
clinical relevance of imaging findings.

 ■ List common clinical manifestations
and imaging findings of drug-induced
injury in the liver and pancreas.

See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

GASTROINTESTINAL IMAGING

72

January-February 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

TEACHING POINTS
 ■ Because of the route of administration of most medications

(ie, oral) and the mechanisms of absorption and metabolism,
the gastrointestinal, hepatobiliary, and pancreatic systems
are highly susceptible to drug-induced injury.

 ■ Esophageal injury is usually caustic and is due to a chemical
reaction of the drug when in direct contact with the esopha-
geal mucosa. Esophageal ulcers induced by medications are
frequently small and discrete and often correspond to the
direct site of contact with the pill.

 ■ NSAIDs are one of those most frequently prescribed classes
of medications worldwide and can result in injury to the
gastrointestinal tract due to their inhibition of prostaglandin,
which impairs gastrointestinal mucosal defense mechanisms.
This injury commonly manifests as ulcers in the stomach and
proximal duodenum and can cause mucosal diaphragms in
the small bowel, especially the ileum.

 ■ ACE inhibitor–induced bowel angioedema and antibiotic-as-
sociated pseudomembranous colitis from Clostridium difficile
infection are two specific entities with well-known causes and
imaging findings. When there is a known history of medica-
tion use, the diagnosis can be made with high accuracy.

 ■ Drug-induced injury to the liver can be classified broadly
as hepatocellular, cholestatic, or mixed injury. Steatosis,
cholestasis, vascular injury, and development of hepatic neo-
plasms are among the most common drug-induced injury
patterns.

Because of the route of administration of
most medications (ie, oral) and the mechanisms
of absorption and metabolism, the gastrointes-
tinal, hepatobiliary, and pancreatic systems are
highly susceptible to drug-induced injury. This
review highlights common medication-induced
complications seen at abdominal imaging. Their
mechanisms of injury are described, and entities
that may have a similar imaging appearance are
discussed.

Esophagus
Drug-induced injury in the esophagus most com-
monly manifests as esophagitis. Patients typi-
cally present with odynophagia, dysphagia, and
retrosternal chest pain (1–3). Prolonged transit
of the drug through the esophagus and increased
contact with the mucosa allow the pill to begin to
dissolve and undergo chemical change while still
in the lumen.

Normally, there is mild extrinsic compression

on the esophagus at the level of the aortic arch,
left main-stem bronchus, and left atrium (2,4,5).
Pill esophagitis is commonly midesophageal be-
cause of enlargement of the aorta or left atrium,
which can increase esophageal compression and
narrowing in this region and delay pill passage.
Intrinsic esophageal pathologic conditions, such
as strictures, can also result in delayed passage of
medications. Other factors that can affect esopha-
geal transit include a suboptimal volume of liquid

intake with medications; recumbent positioning
soon after pill ingestion; and pill size, shape, and
type of coating (5,6).

Ulcer or Esophagitis

Mechanism.—Esophageal injury is usually caustic
and is due to a chemical reaction of the drug when
in direct contact with the esophageal mucosa. For
example, antibiotics such as doxycycline and tetra-
cycline are acidic and can result in a chemical mu-
cosal burn (3). Other drugs, such as ferrous sulfate
and potassium chloride, cause injury from hyperos-
molarity and changes in local blood flow (2,3).

Gastroesophageal reflux also affects the devel-
opment of pill esophagitis. In addition to causing
altered esophageal motility, which can result in
delayed passage of pills through the esophagus,
reflux of acidic gastric juices can lower the pH,
altering the compound’s chemical properties.
For example, the bisphosphonate alendronate is
a common source of pill esophagitis. Although it
is a monosodium salt in alkaline environments,
in the acidic environment (pH <2) of reflux, it
becomes a free acid, which is more damaging to
the esophageal mucosa (4,6).

Imaging Appearance.—At imaging, esophageal
ulcers induced by medications are frequently
small and discrete and often correspond to
the direct site of contact with the pill (Fig 1a).
Histopathologic analysis shows inflammatory
changes and granulation tissue, sometimes with
foreign material and/or dyskeratotic cells indica-
tive of apoptosis of squamous epithelial cells (6).
On double-contrast barium esophagrams, the
ulcers are often shallow, with sharply delineated
margins (Fig 1b) (1,3). The surrounding mucosa
is commonly normal. En face, the ulcers appear
as central punctate collections of barium sur-
rounded by a radiolucent halo that corresponds
to a mound of edema (3,7). They may be single
or multiple. When viewed in profile, they may
appear as elongated, flat, plaquelike filling defects
(Fig 1c). Erosions, which by definition are limited
to the mucosa and do not penetrate through the
muscularis mucosae, can also be seen as linear or
serpiginous collections of barium surrounded by
a radiolucent halo of edema (Fig 1d) (1,7). How-
ever, pill esophagitis may not manifest with any
imaging findings at computed tomography (CT).

Differential Diagnosis.—The differential diagno-
sis for small superficial erosions seen on a barium
esophagram includes herpes esophagitis and
Crohn esophagitis (3,7,8). Herpes esophagitis is
predominately caused by herpes simplex virus type
1 and most commonly occurs in immunocom-

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 1

McGettigan et al  73

Figure 1.  Pill esophagitis. (a) Image from esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) in a 74-year-old woman taking oral iron
supplements who presented with odynophagia shows pill fragments stuck along the mucosa and linear and superficial ulcers
(arrows). Pathologic analysis revealed iron-positive material. (b) Double-contrast esophagram in a 26-year-old woman taking
tetracycline who presented with dysphagia shows a radiolucent round filling defect with a thin rim of barium (arrow). The
finding represents a superficial ulcer with surrounding edema. (c) Double-contrast esophagram (profile view) in a 59-year-old
man taking clindamycin who presented with dysphagia shows an elongated, flat, plaquelike filling defect (arrow) consistent
with an ulcer. (d) Barium esophagram in a 72-year-old woman taking alendronate who presented with dysphagia shows a
cluster of linear erosions (arrows) in the mid esophagus.

promised patients, such as patients with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), organ transplant
recipients, and patients undergoing chemother-
apy, but it can also occur in immunocompetent
patients (8). The imaging appearance is similar to
that of pill esophagitis: small punched-out ulcers
with intervening normal tissue (7,8).

Crohn esophagitis can also manifest at imag-
ing as discrete superficial ulcers with punctate
collections of barium surrounded by a halo
of edema, a finding known as aphthous ulcers
(3,7). These are more frequently seen in the
colon of patients with Crohn disease, but any

portion of the gastrointestinal tract is a potential
site of involvement. The esophagus is rarely the
sole site of Crohn disease. Thus, a diagnosis of
Crohn esophagitis should be considered in a pa-
tient with other gastrointestinal tract symptoms
or a known diagnosis of Crohn disease.

Crohn esophageal erosions can sometimes
have a less discrete and less benign appearance
(7). An area of confluent erosions may mimic find-
ings of malignancy, particularly superficial spread-
ing esophageal carcinoma, of which there are
several subtypes. The plaquelike and flat subtypes
in particular can be difficult to differentiate from

74

January-February 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 2.  Drug-induced gastropathy from NSAIDs. (a) Image from double-contrast up-
per gastrointestinal study in a 67-year-old man who presented with epigastric pain shows
several central punctate collections of barium surrounded by radiolucent halos (arrows).
The  findings  represent  shallow  aphthoid  ulcers.  (b)  Image  from  upper  gastrointestinal
study in a 44-year-old man who presented with epigastric pain shows linear and serpigi-
nous barium collections surrounded by radiolucent halos (arrows), findings consistent with
incomplete erosions.

a cluster of benign ulcers (superficial erosions)
(3,7,9). Therefore, endoscopy is the criterion
standard for tissue diagnosis when an esophageal
erosion or ulcer is identified at imaging.

Stomach

Ulcer

Mechanism.—Drug-induced gastropathy is most
commonly caused by nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-
tory medications (NSAIDs), as these are one of
the most frequently prescribed classes of medica-
tions worldwide (10,11). The mechanism of injury
is related to reduced prostaglandin synthesis.
Prostaglandins play an important role in gas-
tric epithelial defense by stimulating mucus and
bicarbonate secretion and suppressing gastric acid
secretion, thus helping to maintain epithelial cell
reconstitution and mucosal blood flow (11–13).
Most traditional NSAIDs inhibit the cyclooxy-
genase (COX) enzyme involved in prostaglandin
synthesis. COX-1 is a constitutive enzyme impor-
tant for basal mucosal blood flow and pH balance,
and COX-2 is an inducible enzyme important in
maintaining perfusion when mucosal integrity is
challenged (12–14). Thus, prostaglandin inhibi-
tion weakens the mucosal defense mechanisms
and leads to increased acid and pepsin, leaving the
mucosa susceptible to injury (13–16). Selective
COX-2 inhibitors have been shown to decrease
gastric ulceration compared with traditional
NSAIDs, although their use is limited by potential
cardiovascular side effects (17,18).

Imaging Findings.—Pill-induced injury in the
stomach generally occurs in the body and antrum

and along the greater curvature and is mostly a
function of gravity in these areas, given their de-
pendent position. Similar to drug-induced injury
in the esophagus, prolonged contact of the drug
with the gastric mucosa can result in ulceration.
On double-contrast barium studies, the ulcers
have a discrete “punched-out” appearance because
of the sharply defined smooth border typical of
benign ulcers (7,19,20). They appear as central
punctate collections of barium surrounded by
radiolucent halos that correspond to mounds of
edema (Fig 2a) (19–21). The ulcers may vary in
size and can be single or multiple. Injury can also
appear as linear and serpiginous barium collec-
tions (often thought to represent incomplete ero-
sions) surrounded by halos of edema (Fig 2b).
Occasionally, gastric ulcers can be deep,

penetrating through the muscularis mucosae and
involving the submucosa. Although superficial
erosions and shallow ulcers are not detectable at
CT, deeper ulcers appear as mucosal defects and
luminal outpouchings (Fig 3). The ulcer margin
is typically well circumscribed, with a smooth flat
margin and normal wall thickness (19).

Differential Diagnosis.—The likelihood of drug-
induced gastric injury depends largely on the clini-
cal scenario. The differential diagnosis includes
malignancy, infection, and inflammatory condi-
tions. “Malignant ulcers” manifest as ulcerated
masses. They are more likely to be associated with
focal wall thickening (>5 mm), perigastric tissue
abnormalities, and lymphadenopathy (21,22).
Chemotherapy may cause gastric mucosal
ulceration, hemorrhage, and perforation. This is
particularly the case with cytotoxic agents that tar-
get rapidly dividing cells, such as those in the gas-

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 1

McGettigan et al  75

Figure 3.  NSAID-related prepyloric gastric
ulcer  in  a  47-year-old  man  who  presented
with  abdominal  pain.  (a)  Image  from  dou-
ble-contrast  upper  gastrointestinal  study
shows  a  barium-filled  focal  outpouching  of
the distal gastric antrum (arrow). (b) Coro-
nal contrast-enhanced CT image with nega-
tive oral contrast material shows the breach
in the mucosa (arrow) caused by the ulcer.
(c) Correlative endoscopic image shows the
area of ulceration (arrow) projecting beyond
the normal lumen.

Figure
4.  Chemotherapy-induced
gastric  ulceration  in  a  68-year-old
woman.  The  patient  was  undergo-
ing  chemotherapy  with  doxorubicin
and  an  investigational  agent  target-
ing tumor hypoxia. Coronal contrast-
enhanced follow-up CT image shows
a  large  focal  ulceration  in  the  gastric
mucosa  along  the  lesser  curvature
(white arrow), adjacent to a large, het-
erogeneously  enhancing,  malignant
mesenteric sarcoma (black arrow).

can cause a breakdown in the mucosal integrity of
the adjacent gastrointestinal tract (Fig 4) (23,24).
Other causes of gastric ulceration include alcohol,
severe stress (eg, burns), and Crohn disease (19).

Small Bowel

Mucosal Diaphragms

Mechanism.—As with the stomach, the proximal
duodenum can be exposed to the corrosive ef-
fects of pepsin and hydrochloric acid when there
is a breakdown in mucosal integrity, leading to
ulceration (25). NSAIDs are thus a common
offender in drug-induced duodenal ulceration,

trointestinal tract. In some cases of primary gastric
or mesenteric metastases, the tumor provides
structural stability to the gastrointestinal tract.
When targeted with chemotherapy, tumor necrosis

76

January-February 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

wall thickening, and inflammation resulting in
duodenitis (Fig 5), which can progress to frank
perforation. However, the remainder of the small
bowel is not exposed to gastric acid, and thus
NSAID-induced gastrointestinal injury is likely
multifactorial. NSAIDs are weakly acidic lipid-
soluble compounds that disrupt the phospholipid
membranes of enterocytes and cause uncoupling
of mitochondrial phosphorylation, which leads to
breakdown of the mucosal barrier (26–28). This
exposes the epithelium to bile acids, pancreatic
secretions, and intestinal bacteria, resulting in
inflammation. Areas of inflammation can then
hemorrhage, form granulation tissue, and eventu-
ally result in weblike mucosal strictures. NSAID-
induced enteropathy results in thin (usually less
than 3 mm) circumferential rings of mucosa that
cause focal strictures referred to as mucosal dia-
phragms (27–29).

Imaging Findings.—Mucosal diaphragms can be
occult at imaging because, unlike most strictures,
the morphology of the outer bowel wall is typi-
cally not affected. There is a focal intraluminal
web or stricture at the site of the diaphragm that
can lead to marked luminal narrowing. The bowel
in the immediate proximal and distal segments
may be normal in caliber (Fig 6) (27,29), or
there may be upstream dilatation in the setting
of obstruction. Thus, in a patient with long-
term NSAID use and unexplained small bowel
obstruction, mucosal diaphragms should be
considered in the differential diagnosis. Capsule
endoscopy in this setting is controversial (27,30)
because capsule retention may necessitate surgi-
cal removal. There is a relatively high risk for
capsule retention, but complete obstruction is
rare (30–32). In high-risk patients (ie, long-term
NSAID users, patients with Crohn disease or
surgical adhesive disease, and those who have
undergone radiation therapy), a patency cap-
sule, which is designed to dissolve after about 30
hours, is sometimes used to determine whether a
videocapsule can safely be used (30).

Differential Diagnosis.—Although mucosal dia-
phragms were once regarded as pathognomonic, a
study presented at the 2006 International Confer-
ence on Capsule Endoscopy showed a 20% rate
of incorrect diagnosis by four experienced clini-
cians when reviewing cases of NSAID-induced
enteropathy and Crohn disease (27,29,32). The
differential diagnosis for NSAID-induced enter-
opathy is mainly Crohn disease. Crohn disease
usually produces long, thick, inflammatory stric-
tures, while NSAID-induced injury causes thin
fibrotic diaphragms and sharply demarcated ulcers
(29,32–34). Other entities that have been shown

Figure  5.  NSAID  duodenitis  in  a  90-year-old  woman
taking  a  high-dose  nonselective  NSAID  (1000  mg  of
naproxen  twice  a  day).  (a)  Oblique  coronal  nonen-
hanced multiplanar reformatted CT image shows thick-
ening of the duodenal wall (white arrow) and inflamma-
tory stranding in the adjacent fat (arrowheads). A small
amount of free fluid (black arrow) is also seen. (b) EGD
image shows a large circumferential ulcer in the duode-
nal bulb. Pathologic analysis showed active duodenitis
with granulation tissue and ulceration.

to induce mucosal diaphragms include celiac dis-
ease and radiation injury (29).

Although it is rare, cryptogenic multifocal
ulcerous stenosing enteritis (CMUSE) can also
be considered in the differential diagnosis. In
this disease, multiple small fibrous strictures and
shallow ulcers form in the small bowel and often
result in chronic or relapsing ileus or subileus
(35). The gross findings of diaphragm disease are
similar to those of CMUSE. The cause is unclear
but is thought to be related to overstimulated
production of fibrous tissue and is probably
immune-mediated, given the response to treat-
ment with glucocorticosteroids (35).

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 1

McGettigan et al  77

Figure  6.  NSAID-related  mucosal  diaphragm  disease.
(a,  b)  Coronal  (a)  and  axial  (b)  contrast-enhanced  CT
enterographic images in a 60-year-old woman who pre-
sented with bloating show short segments of circumfer-
ential wall thickening in the small bowel (arrow), with lu-
minal narrowing and associated mucosal hyperenhance-
ment. (c) Image from capsule endoscopy in the same pa-
tient shows a small bowel stricture with mucosal erosion.
(d) Gross surgical specimen from small bowel resection in
a patient with a history of small bowel obstruction from
NSAID-related  diaphragm  disease.  Surgical  findings  in-
cluded palpable areas of stricturing 60–100 cm proximal
to  the  ileocecal  valve.  Pathologic  analysis  showed  more
than 10 diaphragms in various phases of evolution in the
wall of the small bowel.

Angioedema

Mechanism.—Angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors are used for treatment of hy-
pertension (36,37). These medications inhibit the
breakdown of bradykinin. Bradykinin activates
the nitric oxide system, leading to increased vas-
cular permeability and capillary leakage. Edema
of the face, oropharynx, lips, and tongue is a
known side effect; however, visceral edema can
also occur, either in addition to these sites or in
isolation (36–38). ACE inhibitor–induced bowel
angioedema most frequently affects middle-aged
women and commonly manifests as abrupt-onset
abdominal pain and nausea, with vomiting and
sometimes diarrhea (37–39). Symptoms usually
occur within the first 7 days of initiating or alter-
ing ACE-inhibitor therapy, but onset has been
reported as many as 10 years later (39).

Imaging Findings.—In the small bowel, the
increased vascular permeability affects the vasa
vasorum, causing bowel wall edema, bowel wall
thickening, and straightening of the involved

segment. At CT, there is decreased attenuation
in the submucosal layer (36). This accentuates
the higher attenuation of the mucosa and serosa,
leading to mural stratification, which is even
more pronounced at contrast-enhanced CT (Fig
7). At magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, T2-
weighted images show increased signal inten-
sity from edema in the submucosal layer of the
involved bowel segment. The jejunum is the most
frequent site of involvement (37). Ascites, mes-
enteric edema, and fluid retention in the small
bowel lumen are frequent findings in patients
who present with acute symptoms (36–38).

Differential Diagnosis.—Segmental small bowel
mural stratification can be seen with small-vessel
vasculitis, small-vessel ischemia, chemotherapy-
induced enteritis, and radiation therapy. ACE
inhibitor–induced angioedema should be con-
sidered if these conditions are excluded and
there is an appropriate clinical history. ACE
inhibitor–induced angioedema rarely manifests as
bowel obstruction, usually has only mild adjacent
inflammatory fat stranding, and follows a non-
vascular distribution (36). Furthermore, ACE
inhibitor–induced angioedema is reversible with
cessation of the medication.

78

January-February 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Table 1: Common Drugs Associated with
Pneumatosis Intestinalis

Drug Class and Common Agents

Corticosteroids
Chemotherapeutics
  Cytotoxic agents: methotrexate, etoposide, dau-
  norubicin, cytarabine, fluorouracil, paclitaxel

  Tyrosine kinase inhibitors: imitinib
Immunosuppressants
Antidiabetics
  a-glucosidase inhibitors: voglibose, acarbose,

  miglitol

Other: lactulose, sorbitol

Figure 8.  Chemotherapy-related colitis and pneumatosis in a
75-year-old man being treated with dacarbazine for leiomyo-
sarcoma. Axial follow-up CT image (wide window setting: cen-
ter = −600 HU, width =1500 HU) shows intramural gas in the
ascending colon. The gas dissects between layers of the wall,
parallels the walls of the colon, and follows the folds (arrows).

additional imaging findings, such as bowel wall
thickening and perienteric soft-tissue stranding in
the setting of bowel ischemia. However, radiologic
features are not reliable indicators of whether the
pneumatosis is due to a life-threatening or a be-
nign cause (41–44). Other secondary findings that
may be seen in both life-threatening and benign
causes include free fluid, free peritoneal air, and
portal or mesenteric venous gas. Although these
findings are nonspecific, their presence increases
the likelihood that the pneumatosis can be attrib-
uted to a life-threatening condition (40,43).

Differential Diagnosis.—Pneumatosis in the small
bowel or colon should be treated as an emergent
finding until life-threatening causes such as bowel
ischemia and impending perforation are excluded
(42). Other conditions that can lead to bowel
necrosis, such as arterial or venous thrombosis,
obstruction, volvulus, and strangulation, should
be considered (41,43). Infectious causes, such as
neutropenic colitis, toxic megacolon, and general-
ized sepsis, may also lead to bowel compromise
and subsequent intramural gas (41).

Figure 7.  ACE inhibitor–induced angioedema in a 50-year-old
woman who developed crampy abdominal pain and vomiting
2  days  after  starting  ACE-inhibitor  therapy  for  hypertension.
Axial contrast-enhanced CT image shows mural stratification in
the duodenum and jejunum, with low-attenuating submucosal
edema (black arrow) adjacent to hyperemic enhancing muco-
sal (white arrowhead) and serosal (white arrow) layers. A small
amount of ascites (black arrowhead) is seen.

Pneumatosis Intestinalis

Mechanism.—Pneumatosis intestinalis is a condi-
tion in which gas is present in the wall of the
small bowel or colon. The small bowel is most
commonly involved (40). Multiple conditions
that range from benign to life threatening have
been associated with pneumatosis.

One proposed mechanism of drug-induced
pneumatosis is loss of mucosal integrity, which
allows intraluminal gas to escape into the bowel
wall. Several medications are well known to be
associated with benign pneumatosis, including
corticosteroids and chemotherapeutic agents
(Table 1) (40–43). In the case of corticosteroids,
it is thought that intramural lymphoid tissue is
depleted, causing disruption in the mucosa and
subsequent dissection of gas into the submucosa
(41). Breakdown of the mucosal barrier may also
allow gas-forming bacteria to enter the bowel
wall (40–42). Intestinal ischemia can be a life-
threatening cause of pneumatosis. Mechanisms of
medication-induced intestinal ischemia include
shunting of blood from mesenteric vessels,
vasospasm, and thrombogenesis (42), which can
result in pneumatosis intestinalis.

Imaging Findings.—Pneumatosis intestinalis and
pneumatosis coli appear as gas within the bowel
wall and can be separated from intraluminal
gas by the mucosal and muscularis layers (41).
The gas parallels the mucosa in the submucosal
or subserosal (less commonly in the muscularis
propria) layer and may be linear or cystic (Fig
8) (41,43,44). The distribution and extent are
variable. In life-threatening causes, there may be

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 1

McGettigan et al  79

Figure 9.  NSAID-related colitis in a 54-year-old woman taking a high-dose nonselective NSAID (6400–7000 mg of
ibuprofen per day) who presented with diffuse abdominal pain. (a) Sagittal nonenhanced reformatted CT image shows
marked thickening of the descending colon with adjacent inflammatory stranding and edema (arrows). (b) Image from
correlative colonoscopy shows linear mucosal ulcerations and mucosal edema in the descending colon.

In addition to medication, other nonemergent

causes of pneumatosis intestinalis include pul-
monary causes such as asthma, chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease, mechanical ventilation
with positive end-expiratory pressure, and cystic
fibrosis (41,43). Inflammatory bowel disease and
iatrogenic causes (eg, colonoscopy) are other
known sources (44).

Finally, pneumatosis can be idiopathic. Cystic

collections of gas in the bowel wall, known as
pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis or coli, are a
subgroup that appears as air-filled cysts in the
submucosa or subserosa, and they are almost al-
ways benign (41,43). However, it is important to
remember that life-threatening pneumatosis can
have a cystic morphology.

Colon

Colitis

Mechanism.—Drug-induced injury to the colon
most frequently presents as colitis. Although
NSAID-induced injury is most common in the
stomach and small bowel, enteric-coated prepara-
tions are thought to be responsible for shifting
some of the injury farther downstream into the
colon (Fig 9) (45,46).

Pseudomembranous colitis is a severe manifes-

tation of superimposed infection, named for the

characteristic pseudomembranes on the mucosa
that are seen at endoscopy. It is frequently a
complication of antibiotic therapy. The common
offenders are broad-spectrum antibiotics such
as cephalosporins, third-generation (extended-
coverage) penicillins, and clindamycin; however,
all antibiotics, including those used for treatment
of this condition (metronidazole and vancomycin),
have been implicated (42–44). These antibiotics
alter the normal intestinal flora and allow Clos-
tridium difficile, a gram-positive bacteria that forms
heat-resistant spores, to colonize the intestine
(47,48). Once in the colon, ingested spores con-
vert to an active state and produce two exotoxins
that are responsible for the colonic injury. These
toxins, which are enterotoxic and cytotoxic, bind
to intestinal receptors, disrupt mucosal integrity,
and stimulate multiple inflammatory media-
tors (49,50). The resulting inflammation leads to
increased capillary permeability, hemorrhage, and
edema. As inflammation within the colon worsens,
ulcerations form with associated necrotic debris,
giving rise to so-called pseudomembranes, which
appear grossly as elevated yellowish-white plaques
on the colonic mucosa (Fig 10a) (47–49).

Imaging Findings.—Imaging findings vary, and
more than 40% of cases may have normal abdomi-
nal radiographs (50). Abnormal radiographic find-
ings include small bowel or colon ileus with seg-
mental or diffuse dilatation, ascites, and nodular
haustral thickening. Thickening of the colon wall
from submucosal hemorrhage and edema results
in the appearance of wide perpendicular bands,
referred to as “thumbprinting,” that are commonly
associated with pseudomembranous colitis (Fig

80

January-February 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 10.  Pseudomembranous colitis. (a) Image from colonoscopy in a 52-year-old man who presented with pro-
fuse diarrhea shows superficial ulcerations with overlying yellow-white plaques that correspond to pseudomembranes.
(b) Abdominal radiograph in a 59-year-old woman who presented with diarrhea shows diffuse thickening of the colon
wall with thumbprinting (arrows). The patient was taking cephalosporin for a urinary tract infection. (c) Pathologic
specimen from colon resection in a 44-year-old woman with toxemia shows colonic mucosa with diffuse active colitis
and polypoid pseudomembranes.  (d) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image in a 62-year-old woman with a history of
pneumonia treated with clindamycin who presented with diarrhea shows pseudomembranous colitis with pancolitis.
There is marked diffuse thickening of the colon wall with submucosal edema (white arrow) and diffuse mucosal hyper-
emia (black arrow).

10b) (47,49). Severe cases can progress to toxic
megacolon, where there is dilatation of the colon
more than 6 cm (48). On fluoroscopic studies with
intraluminal contrast agent, thickened haustra are
evident, the colon can have an irregular, shaggy
margin, and there can be polypoid mucosal
thickening or plaquelike filling defects. The latter
two findings are manifestations of the yellowish
plaques (pseudomembranes) that form on the mu-
cosa (Fig 10c) (47). Fluoroscopic enemas should
be avoided in a patient with pseudomembranous
colitis because of the risk for perforation of the
diseased colon (47).

CT findings of pseudomembranous colitis
include marked wall thickening, which usually
is greater than 4 mm and has been reported to
reach more than 30 mm (Fig 10d) (47,48). The
“target” sign describes alternating attenuation of

the bowel wall, with decreased attenuation of the
submucosa secondary to edema juxtaposed to en-
hancing mucosa. The “accordion” sign describes
oral contrast material trapped between folds of
the thickened edematous colon wall. There is
usually relatively mild pericolonic stranding for
the degree of colonic wall thickening, and ascites
may be present, particularly with advanced dis-
ease (47,48).

Differential Diagnosis.—Entities other than
pseudomembranous colitis that can manifest
with similar radiographic findings include the
acute stage of ulcerative colitis and Crohn colitis,
infectious colitis (as can be seen with enterohe-
morrhagic Escherichia coli), radiation colitis, and
ischemic colitis (48–51). Pseudomembranous
colitis and Crohn colitis tend to produce the

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 1

McGettigan et al  81

Table 2: Examples of Drugs That Can Be As-
sociated with Cholestatic Liver Injury

Drug Class and Common Agents

Antibiotics
  Penicillins: amoxicillin-clavulanate
  Sulfonamides: trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
  Marcrolides: erythromycin
  Tetracyclines: doxycycline
Antifungals: ketoconazole
Antiretrovirals
Anti-inflammatories: diclofenac, ibuprofen
Psychotropes: chlorpromazine, tricyclic antidepres-

sants

Immunosuppressives: cyclosporine, azathioprine
Other: oral contraceptives, estrogens, anabolic

steroids

greatest amount of wall thickening, which is more
irregular and shaggy in pseudomembranous coli-
tis compared with in Crohn colitis (48). Distor-
tion in wall morphology, with polypoid mucosal
projections, may help narrow the differential
diagnosis. As with all drug-induced injury, patient
history plays a major role in determining the
causative factor. Although pseudomembranous
colitis is most commonly a result of toxins pro-
duced by C difficile, alterations in normal bowel
physiology can occur with chemotherapy and
immunosuppressant therapy.

Liver
Medication-induced hepatic injury is a common
phenomenon because most medications contain
compounds that are metabolized by the liver.
Drug-induced injury is the number-one cause of
acute liver failure in the United States and the
most common cause of postmarketing drug with-
drawals and warnings (52,53). It accounts for
approximately 10% of all cases of acute hepatitis
(54). More than 900 drugs have been associated
with hepatotoxicity, the most common being
antibiotics and analgesic drugs (Table 2) (52,55).
Drug-induced liver injury occurs because of the
direct toxic effects of a drug or its metabolites
on the hepatic parenchyma, and the array of
inflammatory mediators that subsequently result.
Liver injury is often categorized according to the
predominant histopathologic and biochemical
features and can be broadly grouped as hepato-
cellular, cholestatic, or mixed hepatocellular and
cholestatic patterns of injury. Further classifica-
tion is often made according to the clinical “phe-
notype” and course of injury and includes acute
hepatitis, cholestatic hepatitis, bland cholestasis,
sinusoidal obstructive syndrome, and steatosis
(nonalcoholic fatty liver) (56–58).

Steatosis

Mechanism.—Steatosis is a frequent finding in
hepatic injury. Steatosis is the accumulation of
lipids within hepatocytes. This can result from
drug injury to mitochondrial structure or pro-
cesses, such as b-oxidation, and energy depletion.
Steatotic liver injury can lead to steatohepatitis,
fibrosis, and cirrhosis (53,55,57). Common drug-
induced causes include chemotherapeutic agents
such as 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), irinotecan, and
methotrexate. Amiodarone, tamoxifen, cortico-
steroids, and antipsychotics are also frequently
associated with steatosis or steatohepatitis.

Imaging Findings.—At ultrasonography (US), the
hepatic parenchyma shows increased echogenicity,
with decreased visibility of the portal triads and
dampening of the ultrasound wave, leading to poor
visualization of the posterior liver. At CT, the liver
shows low attenuation (at least 10 HU less than the
spleen on nonenhanced images; liver attenuation
of less than 40 HU on contrast-enhanced images).
At MR imaging with in-phase and out-of-phase
gradient-echo sequences, there is signal loss (drop-
out) on out-of-phase images when compared with
in-phase images because of the properties of chemi-
cal shift (59). The pattern of fatty deposition may
be diffuse, focal, diffuse with focal sparing, multifo-
cal, perivascular, or subcapsular.

Differential Diagnosis.—Other causes of steatosis
include alcohol, metabolic syndrome (eg, obesity,
insulin resistance, hypertriglyceridemia), gly-
cogen storage disease, Wilson disease, and total
parenteral nutrition.

Cholestatic Injury

Mechanism.—In the cholestatic pattern of injury,
the bile ducts are predominately affected. Often
this is a result of compromised perfusion of the
biliary system, whose blood supply is via the
hepatic artery. Bile duct injury is not an uncom-
mon complication associated with intra-arterial
chemotherapy for treatment of malignancy (60).
Chemotherapeutic agents have direct toxic ef-
fects on the bile ducts and indirect embolization
effects from chemotherapy beads, resulting in
diminutive ducts and, ultimately, ductopenia
(60,61). More than 30 medications have been
implicated in drug-induced ductopenia, most
commonly the immunosuppressive cyclosporine,
the antibiotic trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,
and the antipsychotic chlorpromazine (62,63).

Imaging Findings.—Most commonly, cholestatic
liver injury is not detectable at imaging. When

82

January-February 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 11.  Cholestatic liver injury in a 37-year-old man 2 days after starting treatment with azithromycin. Axial T2-weighted (a)
and T1-weighted (b) contrast-enhanced MR images show periportal edema (arrows in a) and heterogeneous arterial enhance-
ment (arrows in b). No biliary duct dilatation is seen. Liver biopsy revealed cholestasis and focal feathery degeneration of the
hepatocytes, findings indicative of mild steatosis.

present, imaging features of bile duct injury can be
subtle. The most sensitive imaging modalities are
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
or percutaneous cholangiography, in which the bili-
ary tree is directly opacified with contrast material
(64). MR imaging is the most sensitive noninvasive
imaging modality, particularly when heavily T2-
weighted MR cholangiopancreatographic images
are obtained (64,65). One may see small ducts
that are diminished in number. At CT and US,
the ducts are frequently not visible. Nonspecific
findings of liver injury can also be seen, including
hepatomegaly and heterogeneously enhancing pa-
renchyma (Fig 11). When injury is severe, features
of fibrosis and cirrhosis can be seen.

Differential Diagnosis.—In a patient with choles-
tatic liver injury, imaging is important to exclude
other causes of biliary obstruction such as chole-
lithiasis (54,56,59,61). Other extrahepatic causes
of cholestasis include choledocholithiasis or bile
duct tumor and pancreatitis or pancreatic tumor.
Intrahepatic causes, such as primary sclerosing
cholangitis and primary biliary cirrhosis, should
also be excluded.

Vascular Injury

Mechanism.—Drugs may also insult the hepatic
vasculature, resulting in Budd-Chiari syndrome.
Budd-Chiari syndrome is obstruction of the
hepatic venous outflow tracts, which leads to
increased sinusoidal pressure, portal hyperten-
sion, venous stasis, and hepatic congestion. This
can result in ischemic injury to the hepatocytes,
leading to necrosis and fibrosis. Oral contracep-
tive pills have been linked to the development
of Budd-Chiari syndrome (52–54,56,57). The
mechanism is thought to be related to the relative
hypercoagulable state from exogenous estrogen.

Chemotherapeutic agents, particularly platinum
compounds such as oxaliplatin and cisplatin, have
also been linked to sinusoidal injury (57).

Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS), also

known as venoocclusive disease, is blockage of
the small hepatic venules and can be seen in stem
cell or bone marrow recipients (54,56,57). Drug-
induced damage to sinusoidal endothelial cells
leads to necrosis and extrusion into the hepatic
sinusoids, resulting in obstruction and congestion.
Patients present with abdominal pain, swelling,
and weight gain, with or without elevation in
serum enzyme levels. SOS is most commonly seen
with myeloablative regimens (eg, busulfan plus
cyclophosphamide and total body irradiation) in
preparation for hematopoietic stem cell transplan-
tation, although it is now much less common with
current lower-dose regimens (66,67). Other che-
motherapeutic agents, including dacarbazine and
platinum compounds such as cisplatin, oxaliplatin,
and carboplatin, can also cause SOS. Although
there is overlap with the clinical and imaging fea-
tures of Budd-Chiari syndrome, the large hepatic
veins and intrahepatic inferior vena cava typically
remain patent in SOS (21,56,67).

Imaging Findings.—Imaging often shows hepato-
megaly and hepatic congestion. At nonenhanced
CT, this may appear as heterogeneous hepatic at-
tenuation. At contrast-enhanced CT, there may be
heterogeneous enhancement owing to altered per-
fusion in areas of increased sinusoidal pressure from
venous stasis. CT may also show dilated throm-
bosed hepatic veins in Budd-Chiari syndrome (Fig
12) (68). In contrast, the small obstructed hepatic
venules in SOS are not visible at imaging (Fig 13).
At MR imaging, findings are typically most remark-
able on T2-weighted images, which show a hetero-
geneous liver with areas of increased signal intensity
corresponding to edema (21).

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 1

McGettigan et al  83

Figure  12.  Oral  contraceptive  pill–
induced  Budd-Chiari  syndrome  in  a
26-year-old  woman  who  presented
with right upper quadrant pain. Axial
contrast-enhanced  CT  image  shows
an  enlarged  liver  with  abnormal  per-
fusion  and  congestion.  The  hepatic
veins are thrombosed (white arrows),
and the portal veins are markedly at-
tenuated  (black  arrow).  Global  hypo-
perfusion  of  the  spleen  (arrowhead)
represents diffuse infarction.

Figure 13.  SOS. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image in a 52-year-old man with acute myelodysplastic syndrome, obtained
54 days after he underwent hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, shows heterogeneous liver enhancement with a mottled
“nutmeg” appearance. Periportal edema (black arrow) and ascites (white arrows) are seen. (b) Axial contrast-enhanced arterial
phase CT image in a 42-year-old woman being treated with hydrochlorothiazide, doxazosin, and estrogen replacement who
presented with abdominal pain shows heterogeneous hepatic parenchymal enhancement, with large regions of increased at-
tenuation (arrow) representing congestion.

Differential Diagnosis.—Other causes of liver fail-
ure, including graft versus host disease (particularly
in the setting of hematopoietic stem cell transplan-
tation), viral hepatitis, and sepsis, must be excluded.

Neoplasm

Mechanism.—Oral contraceptive pills and ana-
bolic steroids have been associated with develop-
ment of hepatocellular adenomas (HCAs) (69).
HCAs, also known as hepatic adenomas, are
epithelial neoplasms composed of normal hepato-
cytes that are arranged in sheets separated by com-
pressed sinusoids. They can contain “free-floating”
arteries and veins but have no central vein, portal
tract, or connection with the biliary system.
HCAs are classified into three distinct subtypes:
(a) inflammatory HCAs (HCA-I), (b) hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1a (HNF-1A)–mutated HCAs
(HCA-H), and (c) b-catenin–mutated HCAs
(HCA-B). A fourth subtype, “unclassified,” is

also recognized and does not have any specific
gene mutations. Inflammatory HCA is the most
common subtype and manifests frequently in
obese patients and in young women with a history
of oral contraceptive use (70,71). These lesions
harbor mutations in interleukin-6 (IL-6) (71–73).
The mechanism of oral contraceptive pill–related
development of these lesions may be related to
increased IL-6 signaling pathways that may occur
as a result of hormonal manipulation. Inflamma-
tory adenomas have a greater risk of hemorrhage
compared with other subtypes and a 10% risk
of malignancy (70). HNF-1A–mutated subtypes
are the second most common subtype and are
also seen in women with a history of oral con-
traceptive use (70). Many women with HNF-
1A–mutated subtypes have a background of
hepatic steatosis. About 10–15% of all HCAs are
b-catenin–mutated subtypes and are due to acti-
vating mutations of the b-catenin gene (70,71).
These tumors are seen more commonly in men,

84

January-February 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  14.  HCA  in  a  24-year-old  woman  taking
oral contraceptive pills who presented for imaging
follow  up.  Axial  arterial  phase  (a),  portal  venous
phase  (b),  and  1-hour  delayed  phase  (c)  MR  im-
ages obtained with hepatocyte-specific gadolinium
contrast agent show a liver lesion in the right lobe
(arrow)  with  early  arterial  enhancement  that  per-
sists in the portal venous phase. The late persistent
enhancement seen at the periphery in c is due to
a ductular reaction (proliferation of ductular struc-
tures  from  a  large  duct  obstruction).  Pathologic
analysis  of  a  surgical  tissue  sample  showed  HCA,
inflammatory subtype.

particularly if there is a history of anabolic steroid
use or glycogen storage disease, and they have
the highest rate of malignant transformation (70).
Hepatic adenomas larger than 5 cm also have a
greater risk for malignant transformation (70).

Imaging Findings.—Because these tumors can
undergo degenerative changes and may have dilated
sinusoids, blood-filled (pelioid) spaces, myxoid
stroma, focal necrosis, infarction, and fatty change,
their appearance at imaging can be heterogeneous.
At MR imaging, inflammatory subtypes are hy-
perintense on T2-weighted images and isointense
or mildly hyperintense on T1-weighted images,
with minimal to no signal drop with chemical shift
sequences. Inflammatory adenomas also demon-
strate intense enhancement in the arterial phase,
which persists in the portal venous and delayed
phases in dynamic contrast-enhanced series. There
may be persistent enhancement at the periphery in
the hepatobiliary phase because of ductular reaction
(Fig 14) (72,73). Lesions of the HNF-1A–mutated
subtype typically contain intracellular fat, and thus
they are isointense to hyperintense on T1-weighted
images and show signal loss with chemical shift
sequences (Fig 15) (72,73). There are no specific
imaging features of b-catenin–mutated subtypes.

Differential Diagnosis.—The differential diagno-
sis for hepatic adenomas includes other hepatic
neoplasms, particularly focal nodular hyperplasia,
as there is overlap in the imaging features. Both
types of lesions can show early intense contrast
enhancement. MR imaging may be helpful in dif-
ferentiating these two lesions, particularly when
hepatocyte-specific contrast agents are used,
because persistent enhancement in the hepa-
tobiliary phase is more typical of focal nodular
hyperplasia than hepatic adenomas. However,
as previously mentioned, it has been shown that
some inflammatory subtypes of adenoma can
show uptake in the hepatobiliary phase with he-
patocyte-specific agents (72,73). Particularly for
lesions of the HNF-1A–mutated subtype, other
fat-containing hepatic neoplasms should also be
considered and include focal nodular hyperplasia,
angiomyolipoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma.

Pancreas

Pancreatitis

Mechanism.—Drug-induced pancreatitis has been
reported for more than 50 years and may account
for 3%–5% of cases of acute pancreatitis; however,

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 1

McGettigan et al  85

Figure 15.  HCA found at follow-up imaging of a mass noted at US in a 32-year-old woman taking oral con-
traceptive pills. Axial in-phase (a) and out-of-phase (b) MR images show a liver lesion (arrow) in the left hepatic
lobe, with signal dropout seen in b relative to a, a finding consistent with intracellular lipid. On T2-weighted im-
ages (not shown), areas of T2 hyperintensity corresponded to sinusoidal dilatation. Subsequent tissue sampling
confirmed steatotic HCA.

Table 3: Examples of Medications That Can
Cause Drug-induced Pancreatitis

Drug Class and Common Agents

Chemotherapeutics: azathioprine, 2,3-

dideozyinosine, l-asparginase
Diuretics: thiazides, furosemide
Antibiotics: metronidazole, tetracyclines, sulfon-

amides
Estrogens
Statins: simvastatin
ACE inhibitors: captopril, lisinopril, enalopril
Other: sulfasalazine, mesalazine, sodium valproate

Figure  16.  Chemotherapy-related  pancreatitis  in  a  46-year-
old man with metastatic colon carcinoma who presented with
epigastric  pain.  The  patient  had  completed  his  fifth  cycle  of
Folfox  chemotherapy.  Axial  contrast-enhanced  CT  image
shows  pancreatic  and  peripancreatic  inflammation  and  fluid,
findings corresponding to clinical pancreatitis.

the true incidence is unclear because it may still be
underrecognized and underreported by clinicians
(74,75). Pancreatitis results from insult to the exo-
crine function of the pancreas and inappropriate
accumulation or activation of pancreatic digestive
proenzymes. More than100 medications have been
associated with acute pancreatitis (Table 3) (75).
Among the most common are chemotherapeutic
agents (21,74–76), azathioprine (and its metabo-
lite, 6-mercaptopurine), and 23-dideozyinosine
(75). Statins, ACE inhibitors, oral contraceptives,
antiretroviral therapy, and diuretics are also fre-
quently associated with drug-induced pancreatic
injury (74). Proposed general mechanisms include
pancreatic duct constriction, toxic metabolites,
and cytotoxic effects of the drug (74).

Imaging Findings.—The imaging features of
drug-induced pancreatitis are nonspecific and are
identical to those seen with other causes of pancre-
atitis. Interstitial or necrotizing pancreatitis may
result. At CT and MR imaging, interstitial pan-
creatitis manifests as focal or diffuse parenchymal
enlargement due to edema, with indistinct margins
and inflammatory stranding in the peripancreatic
fat (Fig 16) (76). Contrast-enhanced images show
homogeneous enhancement of the pancreatic
parenchyma. An acute peripancreatic fluid collec-
tion with ill-defined margins may be seen early in
the course of the disease (<4 weeks). Pseudocysts
with a well-defined wall can develop as a late
complication (>4 weeks). Necrotizing pancreatitis,
on the other hand, shows areas of nonenhancing
pancreatic tissue at contrast-enhanced CT or MR
imaging. Intra- or extrapancreatic fluid collections
are referred to as acute necrotic collections (with
no fully definable wall) early in the disease course
and as walled-off necrosis (with a definable wall)
late in the course (1,21,25).

86

January-February 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Differential Diagnosis.—Common causes of pan-
creatitis should be excluded, including gallstone
and alcohol-induced pancreatitis. Other possible
causes that should be considered include autoim-
mune pancreatitis, hypercalcemia, hypertriglyc-
eridemia, trauma, and pancreatic malignancy.

Conclusion

Drug-induced complications frequently involve
the gastrointestinal system and can cause varying
degrees of injury. Pill esophagitis commonly affects
the middle third of the esophagus and may manifest
with imaging findings similar to those of herpes or
Crohn esophagitis, appearing as superficial discrete
ulcers with normal intervening mucosa. NSAIDs
impair protection and maintenance of mucosal
defense mechanisms mediated by the prostaglan-
din pathway. Imaging findings of NSAID-induced
injury range from superficial aphthous ulcers to
deeper penetrating ulcers in the stomach and
duodenum, bowel wall thickening, and mucosal
diaphragms. These diaphragms can be difficult to
see at imaging in the absence of bowel obstruction.
Medication-induced injury in the bowel can
manifest as ACE inhibitor–induced angioedema,
antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis,
and pneumatosis intestinalis. In the liver, medica-
tion-induced injury can broadly result in hepato-
cellular or cholestatic injury (or a combination).
Imaging findings are nonspecific and generally
include hepatomegaly, steatosis, and, in cases of
severe injury, fibrosis and cirrhosis. Cellular in-
jury is most prominent in the periportal regions.
Oral contraceptive pills are associated with
HCAs (inflammatory and HNF-1A subtypes) and
vascular injury such as Budd-Chiari and sinusoidal
obstructive syndromes. Finally, medications can
cause pancreatitis, with imaging findings similar to
those in other causes of pancreatitis.

Radiologists should maintain awareness for
drug-induced injury, particularly after excluding
other disease processes that can produce similar
imaging findings. This may help avoid delayed
diagnosis and prolonged exposure to the offend-
ing agent.

References
  1. Gordon IO, Konda V, Noffsinger AE. Drug-induced injury
of  the  gastrointestinal  tract.  Surg  Pathol  Clin  2010;3(2):
361–393.

  2. Tutuian R; Clinical Lead Outpatient Services and Gastro-
intestinal  Function  Laboratory.  Adverse  effects  of  drugs
on  the  esophagus.  Best  Pract  Res  Clin  Gastroenterol
2010;24(2):91–97.

  3. Levine MS, Rubesin SE. Diseases of the esophagus: diagnosis
with esophagography. Radiology 2005;237(2):414–427.
  4. Gómez V, Xiao SY. Alendronate-induced esophagitis in an

elderly woman. Int J Clin Exp Pathol 2009;2(2):200–203.

  5. Bailey  RT  Jr,  Bonavina  L,  McChesney  L,  et  al.  Factors
influencing the transit of a gelatin capsule in the esophagus.
Drug Intell Clin Pharm 1987;21(3):282–285.

  6. Vãlean S, Petrescu M, Cãtinean A, Chira R, Mircea PA. Pill
esophagitis. Rom J Gastroenterol 2005;14(2):159–163.
  7. Eisenberg RL. Gastrointestinal radiology: a pattern approach.
4th  ed.  Philadelphia,  Pa:  Lippincott,  Williams  &  Wilkins,
2003; 55–67, 102–108, 896–897.

  8. DeGaeta L, Levine MS, Guglielmi GE, Raffensperger EC,
Laufer I. Herpes esophagitis in an otherwise healthy patient.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 1985;144(6):1205–1206.

  9. Lee SS, Ha HK, Byun JH, et al. Superficial esophageal cancer:
esophagographic  findings  correlated  with  histopathologic
findings. Radiology 2005;236(2):535–544.

10.  Vella  V.  Drug-induced  peptic  ulcer  disease.  J  Malta  Coll

Pharm Pract 2005;10:15–19.

11.  Matsui  H,  Shimokawa  O,  Kaneko  T,  Nagano  Y,  Rai
K, Hyodo I. The pathophysiology of non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drug (NSAID)–induced mucosal injuries in
stomach and small intestine. J Clin Biochem Nutr 2011;48
(2):107–111.

12.  Peskar BM. Role of cyclooxygenase isoforms in gastric mucosal

defence. J Physiol Paris 2001;95(1–6):3–9.

13.  Cryer B, Feldman M. Cyclooxygenase-1 and cyclooxygen-
ase-2 selectivity of widely used nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs. Am J Med 1998;104(5):413–421.

14.  Perini RF, Ma L, Wallace JL. Mucosal repair and COX-2

inhibition. Curr Pharm Des 2003;9(27):2207–2211.

15.  Patterson MK, Castellsague J, Walker AM. Hospitalization for
peptic ulcer and bleeding in users of selective COX-2 inhibitors
and nonselective NSAIDs with special reference to celecoxib.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2008;17(10):982–988.
16.  Ma L, del Soldato P, Wallace JL. Divergent effects of new
cyclooxygenase  inhibitors  on  gastric  ulcer  healing:  shift-
ing  the  angiogenic  balance.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A
2002;99(20):13243–13247.

17.  Howes LG. Selective COX-2 inhibitors, NSAIDs and car-
diovascular events: is celecoxib the safest choice? Ther Clin
Risk Manag 2007;3(5):831–845.

18.  Wallace JL. Prostaglandins, NSAIDs, and gastric mucosal
protection:  why  doesn’t  the  stomach  digest  itself?  Physiol
Rev 2008;88(4):1547–1565.

19.  Rubesin SE, Levine MS, Laufer I. Double-contrast upper
gastrointestinal radiography: a pattern approach for diseases
of the stomach. Radiology 2008;246(1):33–48.

20.  Freeman AH, Sala E. Conventional radiology of the stomach
and duodenum. In: Freeman AH, Sala E, eds. Radiology
of the stomach and duodenum. New York, NY: Springer,
2008; 40–43.

21.  Gore RM, Levine MS. Textbook of gastrointestinal radiology.
4th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Elsevier Saunders, 2015; 467–477,
1639, 1680–1696.

22.  Tsianos E, Gossios K. CT evaluation of benign gastric lesions.

Ann Gastroenterol 2004;17(1):31–36.

23.  Carter J, Durfee J. A case of bowel perforation after neoad-
juvant chemotherapy for advanced epithelial ovarian cancer.
Gynecol Oncol 2007;107(3):586–589.

24.  Sliesoraitis S, Tawfik B. Bevacizumab-induced bowel perfora-

tion. J Am Osteopath Assoc 2011;111(7):437–441.

25.  Bateman  N,  Kerr  S.  Gastrointestinal  disorders.  In:  Lee
A, ed. Adverse drug reactions. 2nd ed. London, England:
Pharmaceutical Press, 2006; 157–183.

26.  Boelsterli  UA,  Redinbo  MR,  Saitta  KS.  Multiple
NSAID-induced hits injure the small intestine: underly-
ing mechanisms and novel strategies. Toxicol Sci 2013;
131(2):654–667.

27.  Kelly ME, McMahon LE, Jaroszewski DE, Yousfi MM, De
Petris G, Swain JM. Small-bowel diaphragm disease: seven
surgical cases. Arch Surg 2005;140(12):1162–1166.

28.  Hatti K, Giuliano V. NSAID induced small bowel strictures.

Ann Orthop Rheumatol 2014;2(1):1011.

29.  Flicek KT, Hara AK, De Petris G, Pasha SF, Yadav AD,
Johnson  CD.  Diaphragm  disease  of  the  small  bowel:  a
retrospective review of CT findings. AJR Am J Roentgenol
2014;202(2):W140–W145.

30.  Radwin  MI.  NSAID  enteropathy  and  capsule  retention;
complication  or  guide  to  therapy?  Visible  Human  Journal
of  Endoscopy  2009;8(2).  http://www.vhjoe.org/Volume8Is
sue2/8-2-4.htm. Published 2009. Accessed February 15, 2015.

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 1

McGettigan et al  87

31.  Manchalapati  P,  Cave  DR.  Capsule  retention:  it’s  not  all
bad! Visible Human Journal of Endoscopy 2010;9(2). http://
www.vhjoe.org/index.php/vhjoe/article/view/20/19. Published
2010. Accessed February 15, 2015.

32.  Hara AK, Leighton JA, Sharma VK, Heigh RI, Fleischer DE.
Imaging of small bowel disease: comparison of capsule en-
doscopy, standard endoscopy, barium examination, and CT.
RadioGraphics 2005;25(3):697–711; discussion 711–718.
33.  Matsumoto T, Iida M, Nakamura S, Hizawa K, Yao T, Fu-
jishima M. Crohn’s disease of aphthous type: serial changes
in intestinal lesions. Br J Radiol 2000;73(874):1046–1051.
34.  Dilauro  S,  Crum-Cianflone  NF.  Ileitis:  when  it  is  not
Crohn’s  disease.  Curr  Gastroenterol  Rep  2010;12(4):
249–258.

35.  Chung SH, Jo Y, Ryu SR, et al. Diaphragm disease compared
with cryptogenic multifocal ulcerous stenosing enteritis. World
J Gastroenterol 2011;17(23):2873–2876.

36.  De Backer AI, De Schepper AM, Vandevenne JE, Schoeters
P, Michielsen P, Stevens WJ. CT of angioedema of the small
bowel. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2001;176(3):649–652.
37.  Scheirey CD, Scholz FJ, Shortsleeve MJ, Katz DS. Angio-
tensin-converting  enzyme  inhibitor–induced  small-bowel
angioedema:  clinical  and  imaging  findings  in  20  patients.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 2011;197(2):393–398.

38.  Campbell  T,  Peckler  B,  Hackstadt  RD,  Payor  A.  ACE
inhibitor–induced angioedema of the bowel. Case Rep Med
2010;2010:690695.

39.  Locascio EJ, Mahler SA, Arnold TC. Intestinal angioedema
misdiagnosed as recurrent episodes of gastroenteritis. West
J Emerg Med 2010;11(4):391–394.

40.  Pear  BL.  Pneumatosis  intestinalis:  a  review.  Radiology

1998;207(1):13–19.

41.  Ho LM, Paulson EK, Thompson WM. Pneumatosis intesti-
nalis in the adult: benign to life-threatening causes. AJR Am
J Roentgenol 2007;188(6):1604–1613.

42.  Adar  T,  Paz  K.  Images  in  clinical  medicine:  pneumatosis
intestinalis.  N  Engl  J  Med  2013;368(15):e19.  http://www
.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMicm1205591.  Published
April 11, 2013. Accessed March 14, 2015.

43.  Wu SS, Yen HH. Images in clinical medicine: pneumatosis
cystoides intestinalis. N Engl J Med 2011;365(8):e16. http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21864163. Published August
25, 2011. Accessed March 14, 2015.

44.  Zhang  H,  Jun  SL,  Brennan  TV.  Pneumatosis  intesti-
nalis:  not  always  a  surgical  indication.  Case  Rep  Surg
2012;2012:719713.  doi:0.1155/2012/719713.  Published
November 12, 2012. Accessed March 10, 2015.

45.  Cappell  MS.  Colonic  toxicity  of  administered  drugs  and
chemicals. Am J Gastroenterol 2004;99(6):1175–1190.
46.  Huber T, Ruchti C, Halter F. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drug–induced colonic strictures: a case report. Gastroenterol-
ogy 1991;100(4):1119–1122.

47.  Kawamoto S, Horton KM, Fishman EK. Pseudomembra-
nous colitis: spectrum of imaging findings with clinical and
pathologic correlation. RadioGraphics 1999;19(4):887–897.
48.  Kirkpatrick ID, Greenberg HM. Evaluating the CT diagnosis
of Clostridium difficile colitis: should CT guide therapy? AJR
Am J Roentgenol 2001;176(3):635–639.

49.  Thoeni  RF,  Cello  JP.  CT  imaging  of  colitis.  Radiology

2006;240(3):623–638.

50.  Ramachandran I, Sinha R, Rodgers P. Pseudomembranous
colitis revisited: spectrum of imaging findings. Clin Radiol
2006;61(7):535–544.

51.  Trudel JL. Clostridium difficile colitis. Clin Colon Rectal Surg

2007;20(1):13–17.

54.  Zimmerman HJ. Drug-induced liver disease. Clin Liver Dis

2000;4(1):73–96, vi.

55.  Dağ  MS,  Aydınlı  M,  Oztürk  ZA,  et  al.  Drug-  and  herb-
induced liver injury: a case series from a single center. Turk
J Gastroenterol 2014;25(1):41–45.

56.  Drug-induced Liver Injury Network. National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases Web site. https://
dilin.dcri.duke.edu/.  Updated  April  17,  2013.  Accessed
February 4, 2015.

57.  LiverTox: clinical and research information on drug-induced
liver injury. National Institutes of Health. http://www.livertox
.nih.gov/. Updated January 29, 2015. Accessed March 18,
2015.

58.  Hamer OW, Aguirre DA, Casola G, Lavine JE, Woenckhaus
M, Sirlin CB. Fatty liver: imaging patterns and pitfalls. Ra-
dioGraphics 2006;26(6):1637–1653.

59.  Holt MP, Ju C. Mechanisms of drug-induced liver injury.
AAPS  J  2006;8(1):e48–e54.  doi:10.1208/aapsj080106.
Published February 3, 2006. Accessed February 10, 2015.

60.  Miyayama S, Yamashiro M, Okuda M, et al. Main bile duct
stricture occurring after transcatheter arterial chemoembo-
lization for hepatocellular carcinoma. Cardiovasc Intervent
Radiol 2010;33(6):1168–1179.

61.  Faria  LC,  Resende  CC,  Couto  CA,  Couto  OF,  Fonseca
LP, Ferrari TC. Severe and prolonged cholestasis caused by
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole: a case report. Clinics (Sao
Paulo) 2009;64(1):71–74.

62.  Padda MS, Sanchez M, Akhtar AJ, Boyer JL. Drug-induced

cholestasis. Hepatology 2011;53(4):1377–1387.

63.  Bhamidimarri KR, Schiff E. Drug-induced cholestasis. Clin

Liver Dis 2013;17(4):519–531, vii.

64.  ElSayed EY, El Maati AA, Mahfouz M. Diagnostic value of
magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography in cholestatic
jaundice. Egypt J Radiol Nucl Med 2013;44(2):137–146.
65.  Gossard AA. Diagnosis of cholestasis. In: Carey EJ, Lindor
KD, eds. Cholestatic liver disease. 2nd ed. New York, NY:
Springer, 2014; 1–12.

66.  Dignan  FL,  Wynn  RF,  Hadzic  N,  et  al.  BCSH/BSBMT
guideline:  diagnosis  and  management  of  veno-occlusive
disease  (sinusoidal  obstruction  syndrome)  following
haematopoietic  stem  cell  transplantation.  Br  J  Haematol
2013;163(4):444–457.

67.  Zhou H, Wang Y-XJ, Lou HY, Xu XJ, Zhang MM. Hepatic
sinusoidal obstruction syndrome caused by herbal medicine:
CT and MRI features. Korean J Radiol 2014;15(2):218–225.
68.  Brancatelli G, Vilgrain V, Federle MP, et al. Budd-Chiari
syndrome: spectrum of imaging findings. AJR Am J Roent-
genol 2007;188(2):W168–W176.

69.  Ramachandran R, Kakar S. Histological patterns in drug-
induced liver disease. J Clin Pathol 2009;62(6):481–492.
70.  Dhingra S, Fiel MI. Update on the new classification of hepatic
adenomas: clinical, molecular, and pathologic characteristics.
Arch Pathol Lab Med 2014;138(8):1090–1097.

71.  Nault JC, Zucman Rossi J. Molecular classification of hepa-
tocellular adenomas. Int J Hepatol 2013;2013:315947.
72.  Grazioli L, Olivetti L, Mazza G, Bondioni MP. MR imag-
ing  of  hepatocellular  adenomas  and  differential  diagnosis
dilemma. Int J Hepatol 2013;2013:374170.

73.  Agarwal S, Fuentes-Orrego JM, Arnason T, et al. Inflam-
matory  hepatocellular  adenomas  can  mimic  focal  nodular
hyperplasia  on  gadoxetic  acid-enhanced  MRI.  AJR  Am  J
Roentgenol 2014;203(4):W408–W414.

74.  Kaurich T. Drug-induced acute pancreatitis. Proc Bayl Univ

Med Cent 2008;21(1):77–81.

75.  Tenner  S.  Drug  induced  acute  pancreatitis:  does  it  exist?

52.  Pandit A, Sachdeva T, Bafna P. Drug-induced hepatotoxicity:

World J Gastroenterol 2014;20(44):16529–16534.

a review. J Appl Pharm Sci 2012;2(5):233–243.

53.  Kshirsagar A, Vetal Y, Ashok P, et al. Drug induced hepato-
toxicity: a comprehensive review. The Internet Journal of Phar-
macology 2008;7(1). http://ispub.com/IJPHARM/7/1/3723.
Published 2008. Accessed February 10, 2015.

76.  Torrisi JM, Schwartz LH, Gollub MJ, Ginsberg MS, Bosl
GJ, Hricak H. CT findings of chemotherapy-induced toxic-
ity: what radiologists need to know about the clinical and
radiologic manifestations of chemotherapy toxicity. Radiology
2011;258(1):41–56.

This journal-based SA-CME activity has been approved for AMA PRA Category 1 CreditTM. See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

