This copy is for personal use only. To order printed copies, contact reprints@rsna.org

740

Advanced Imaging Techniques in
Evaluation of Colorectal Cancer1

Roberto García-Figueiras, MD, PhD
Sandra Baleato-González, MD, PhD
Anwar R. Padhani, MBBS, MRCP,
  FRCR
Antonio Luna-Alcalá, MD, PhD
Ana Marhuenda, MD
Joan C. Vilanova, MD, PhD
Iria Osorio-Vázquez, MD
Anxo Martínez-de-Alegría, MD
Antonio Gómez-Caamaño, MD

Abbreviations:  ADC  =  apparent  diffusion
coefficient,  CRC  =  colorectal  cancer,  DCE  =
dynamic  contrast-enhanced,  DWI  =  diffusion-
weighted imaging, FDG = fluorine 18 fluorode-
oxyglucose, FLT = fluorotymidine, RC = rectal
cancer

RadioGraphics 2018; 38:740–765

https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.2018170044

Content Codes:

1From  the  Departments  of  Radiology  (R.G.F.,
S.B.G., I.O.V., A.M.d.A.) and Radiation Oncol-
ogy (A.G.C.), Hospital Clínico Universitario de
Santiago de Compostela, Choupana s/n, 15706
Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Paul Strickland
Scanner  Centre,  Mount  Vernon  Cancer  Cen-
tre,  Northwood,  Middlesex,  England  (A.R.P.);
Health Time, Jaén, Spain (A.L.A.); Department
of Radiology, University Hospitals of Cleveland,
Case  Western  Reserve  University,  Cleveland,
Ohio  (A.L.A.);  Department  of  Radiology,  IVO
(Instituto  Valenciano  de  Oncología),  Valencia,
Spain  (A.M.);  and  Department  of  Radiology,
Clínica Girona and IDI, Girona, Spain (J.C.V.).
Presented  as  an  education  exhibit  at  the  2016
RSNA  Annual  Meeting.  Received  March  9,
2017; revision requested August 18 and received
September  3;  accepted  September  12.  For  this
journal-based  SA-CME  activity,  the  authors
A.R.P. and A.L.A. have provided disclosures (see
end of article); all other authors, the editor, and
the reviewers have disclosed no relevant relation-
ships. Address correspondence to R.G.F. (e-
mail: roberto.garcia.figueiras@sergas.es).

©RSNA, 2018

SA-CME LEArnIng ObjECTIvES

After completing this journal-based SA-CME
activity, participants will be able to:
 ■ Identify the biologic and technical
bases of advanced imaging techniques.

 ■ Recognize the clinical value of these im-
aging techniques in patients with CRC.

 ■ List the advantages and limitations of
these techniques in assessment of pa-
tients with CRC.

See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

Imaging techniques are clinical decision-making tools in the evalu-
ation of patients with colorectal cancer (CRC). The aim of this
article is to discuss the potential of recent advances in imaging for
diagnosis, prognosis, therapy planning, and assessment of response
to treatment of CRC. Recent developments and new clinical ap-
plications of conventional imaging techniques such as virtual colo-
noscopy, dual-energy spectral computed tomography, elastography,
advanced computing techniques (including volumetric rendering
techniques and machine learning), magnetic resonance (MR) im-
aging–based magnetization transfer, and new liver imaging tech-
niques, which may offer additional clinical information in patients
with CRC, are summarized. In addition, the clinical value of func-
tional and molecular imaging techniques such as diffusion-weighted
MR imaging, dynamic contrast material–enhanced imaging, blood
oxygen level–dependent imaging, lymphography with contrast
agents, positron emission tomography with different radiotracers,
and MR spectroscopy is reviewed, and the advantages and disad-
vantages of these modalities are evaluated. Finally, the future role of
imaging-based analysis of tumor heterogeneity and multiparametric
imaging, the development of radiomics and radiogenomics, and fu-
ture challenges for imaging of patients with CRC are discussed.

Online supplemental material is available for this article.

©RSNA, 2018 • radiographics.rsna.org

Introduction

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer world-
wide and represents 10% of all new cancer diagnoses (1). CRC is a
heterogeneous disease that exhibits substantial spatial phenotypic and
genotypic variations. Malignant CRC tumors are biologically com-
plex, and our current understanding of how CRC behaves probably
is limited. Anatomically based imaging features, such as the status of
the circumferential resection margin and depth of tumor spread in
rectal cancer (RC), have been validated as prognostic and/or predic-
tive imaging biomarkers and currently are used to stratify patients into
treatment groups. However, conventional imaging techniques exhibit
clear limitations in the evaluation of tumor phenotypes.

Recent developments and new clinical applications of conventional

imaging techniques (eg, dual-energy spectral computed tomography
[CT], elastography, virtual colonoscopy) may offer additional informa-
tion in patients with CRC. Moreover, imaging findings derived from
functional and molecular imaging with diffusion-weighted imaging
(DWI), dynamic contrast material–enhanced (DCE) imaging, blood
oxygen level–dependent imaging, positron emission tomography
(PET) with different radiotracers, and MR spectroscopy may be
critical in decision making for patients with CRC. The use of lympho-
tropic contrast agents also may be critical (2–4).

Gastrointestinal imaGinG

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  741

TEAChIng POInTS
 ■ Anatomically  based  imaging  features,  such  as  the  status  of
the circumferential resection margin and the depth of tumor
spread in RC, have been validated as prognostic and/or pre-
dictive imaging biomarkers and currently are used to stratify
patients into treatment groups. However, conventional imag-
ing  techniques  exhibit  clear  limitations  in  the  evaluation  of
tumor phenotypes.

 ■ Clinical and radiologic assessment of tumor response current-
ly does not allow the accurate identification of patients with
pathologic complete response after neoadjuvant therapy.

 ■ DCE  measures  are  totally  dependent  on  the  analysis  model
and imaging technique applied. These features limit the index-
es and biologically relevant parameters that can be obtained.

 ■ PET/CT is an established technique for decision making that
may have a significant clinical effect in in patients with various
stages of CRC. FDG PET/CT is more sensitive than CT alone
for evaluation of apparently limited metastatic disease before
intervention  or  the  presence  of  extrahepatic  disease,  which
may improve staging to avoid unnecessary surgery. However,
there is insufficient scientific evidence to recommend the rou-
tine use of FDG PET/CT in the preoperative staging of CRC.

 ■ In  radiomics  and  radiogenomics,  advanced  computational
techniques  are  used  to  extract  and  analyze  innumerable
quantitative descriptors of tumor heterogeneity and pheno-
type  (eg,  shape,  intensity,  texture)  from  radiologic  images
and to correlate them with clinical reports, laboratory test re-
sults, and gene-expression patterns or proteomic data.

CRC imaging is moving beyond pure anatomic

evaluation. Medical images contain information
that reflects underlying tumor biology. Multipara-
metric evaluation and imaging assessment of can-
cer heterogeneity are evolving tools with promising
results (5–7). Advanced imaging may offer the
possibility of global evaluation of tumor pheno-
types at different levels and generation of patient
subgroups based on imaging features, which may
show prognostic and/or predictive relevance. The
extraction and analysis of quantitative imaging–
derived descriptors of tumor phenotypes may be
correlated with clinical data and gene expression
patterns, allowing the development of radiomics
and radiogenomics (7–9) (Fig 1).

In this article, we review the established and

expected contributions of all of these imaging
techniques in the management of CRC.

recent Developments in
Conventional Imaging Techniques
Imaging is a major component in the evaluation
of patients with CRC, because it is crucial for
classic TNM staging, which allows clinical man-
agement of CRC to be determined. In addition,
some radiologic features can be used to clas-
sify different CRC tumor types. Both mucinous
and signet ring cell tumors are associated with
young age, advanced tumor stage, different tumor
spread patterns, and poor response to neoadju-

vant chemotherapy and radiation therapy, which
explains their worse disease-free and overall
survival outcomes compared with nonmucinous
tumors. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and
CT enable detection of the mucinous component
in the tumors, which appears as areas of high
signal intensity on T2-weighted MR images and
extensive hypoattenuating areas with heteroge-
neous contrast enhancement and foci of calcifica-
tions on CT images (10–12).

Conventional imaging techniques are clini-
cal decision-making tools in patients with CRC
and can be used for noninvasive evaluation of
important features, including the relationship of
the tumor to surgical planes (eg, circumferential
resection margin and anal sphincter involvement)
and other important imaging prognostic features,
such as depth of tumor spread, extramural vascu-
lar invasion, presence of malignant lymph nodes
and/or tumor deposits, and differentiation of mu-
cinous from nonmucinous tumors (2,3,10–12)
(Fig 2). In addition, imaging is important in the
assessment of posttreatment tumor response (ie,
tumor regression grading at MR imaging) and for
surveillance after therapy (2).

Recently, conventional imaging technology has
improved, with substantial advances in hardware
and software. This progress has allowed the emer-
gence of new techniques and clinical applications
of imaging such as dual-energy spectral CT and
elastography and advanced computing techniques
including volumetric rendering techniques and ma-
chine learning, MR imaging–based magnetization
transfer, and advanced liver imaging techniques (eg,
use of hepatospecific contrast agents), which may
offer additional clinical information in patients with
CRC (Table E1 [online]).

Dual-energy Spectral CT
Because the modality involves the use of different
energy levels, dual-energy spectral CT allows ma-
terial decomposition based on energy-dependent
attenuation profiles of specific materials and tissue
characterization. It also permits the quantifica-
tion of the attenuation caused by iodine contrast
material and the calculation of iodine concentra-
tion, which can be displayed as a color map that
provides a more reliable measurement of tissue
enhancement. In patients with CRC, dual-energy
spectral CT allows detection and characterization
of CRC tumors and extracolonic findings based
on iodine uptake (Fig 3).

Published data also suggest that dual-energy

spectral CT may improve tumor grading and
staging (13,14). Dual-energy spectral CT–de-
rived virtual monochromatic images depict
more subtle contrast enhancement than do the
default polychromatic images of single-energy

742  May-June 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 1.  Chart shows advanced imaging techniques for global evaluation of tumor phenotypes at different levels, from pure ana-
tomic imaging techniques to functional-molecular imaging techniques, imaging-based analysis of tumor heterogeneity and complex-
ity, and the development of radiomics and radiogenomics. MRSI = MR spectroscopic imaging.

Figure 2.  Mucinous RC stage cT4a cN2-V2
in  a  55-year-old  man.  Sagittal  T2-weighted
MR image shows peritoneal involvement (ar-
row)  and  also  depicts  important  prognostic
features such as extramural vascular invasion
(white  arrowhead),  presence  of  malignant
lymph  nodes  (black  arrowhead),  and  muci-
nous  differentiation  (note  the  extensive  hy-
perintense areas in the tumor).

CT, improving lesion conspicuity and lesion-to-
parenchyma contrast in cases of liver metastatic
deposits. Preliminary results suggest that iodine
concentration may be a useful parameter for
discriminating lymph node metastases (15).

Elastography
Tumors usually are stiffer than normal bowel
wall tissue (Fig 4) (Movie 1). US elastography
for assessment of tissue hardness may be a use-
ful tool for differentiating between benign and
malignant lesions in the rectum with an endorectal
probe. Waage et al (16) reported that this tech-
nique might enable distinction between benign
adenomas and invasive adenocarcinomas. More-
over, malignant lymph nodes also should display
increased stiffness at elastography, although, to
our knowledge, there are no published data on
the elastographic assessment of lymph nodes in
patients with CRC.

MR elastography is also an emerging technol-
ogy for quantitative assessment of the mechani-
cal properties of tissue, particularly in the liver.
This technique has shown promise for focal liver

characterization, and malignant lesions, including
metastases from CRC, show significantly higher
mean shear stiffness than do benign tumors and
normal liver tissue.

Advanced Computing Techniques
The introduction of continuous improvements in
the computing capabilities of radiologic equip-
ment has allowed the development of volumetric
rendering techniques and machine learning ap-
plications in patients with CRC.

The value of volumetric rendering techniques

(eg, virtual endoscopy, maximum intensity

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  743

changes in tumor volume are especially important
in the context of tumor response to therapy. In the
case of RC, the degree of reduction in the post-
therapy volume ratio is associated with disease-free
survival and tumor regression grade. Use of the
tumor volume reduction rate is superior to use of
the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
(RECIST) criteria for prediction of the pathologic
response of RC treated with neoadjuvant radiation
therapy and chemotherapy.

MR volumetry based on T2-weighted MR im-
ages is also better than tumor size for suggesting
a pathologic complete response after radiation
therapy and chemotherapy (Fig 6). However, it is
difficult to distinguish between therapy-induced
fibrosis and residual viable tumor on the basis of
only T2-weighted MR images (19–21). Finally,
tumor delineation is easier with functional and
molecular imaging techniques, such as DWI or
fluorine 18 (18F) fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)
PET, because these techniques have superior
intrinsic contrast resolution (19–21).

Surgical resection improves survival in pa-
tients with CRC that has metastasized to the
liver. In these patients, the size of the remnant
liver affects postoperative mortality and morbid-
ity. The use of CT- or MR imaging–based liver
volumetry and virtual liver resection for preop-
erative planning of the hepatectomy is critical to
ensure procedural success in hepatic resection of
metastatic CRC (12,22) (Fig 7).

Three-dimensional Endoscopic US.—Endoscopic
US is becoming an established imaging modality
for use in local-regional staging of RC. Three-
dimensional endoscopic US has improved the
accuracy of tumor and node staging compared
with that of conventional endoscopic US.

Machine Learning in CRC.—An active area of
investigation is the application of machine learning
in patients with CRC. The use of computer-aided
detection and diagnosis in CT colonography has
been explored and has shown increased reader
sensitivity at CRC screening (23). In addition,
the increasing volume of imaging data in clini-
cal practice will require the use of automated and
intelligent systems for analysis in multiple applica-
tions, such as image segmentation and registration,
image fusion, and image-guided therapy.

Magnetization Transfer Mr Imaging
Discriminating between fibrosis and tumor rem-
nants on the basis of morphologic MR imaging
alone is a challenge. Conventional MR imaging
shows low sensitivity for discriminating pathologic
complete response from residual tumor (24).
Magnetization transfer imaging is a technique that

Figure 3.  CRC in a 57-year-old man. Sagittal reformat-
ted colored iodine map from dual-energy CT shows a
polypoid  tumor  that  is  producing  a  sigmoid  invagina-
tion (arrows).

projection, or surface-shaded volume rendering)
has been documented in the literature and adds
diagnostic capabilities in patients with CRC on
the basis of different imaging techniques.

Virtual Colonoscopy.—A particularly important
application of surface-rendering techniques is
virtual colonoscopy based on CT or MR imag-
ing. CT colonography has evolved to become a
clear alternative to optical colonoscopy for de-
tection of colorectal neoplasias (17,18) (Fig 5).
The use of MR colonography in clinical practice
has been limited. Virtual colonoscopy involves
the obtaining of two- and three-dimensional im-
ages of the entire colon and rectum after bowel
distention. CT colonography offers wider avail-
ability, reduced examination time and imaging
artifacts, higher spatial resolution, and lower
costs, while MR colonography is not limited by
the use of ionizing radiation, although it is less
commonly used in clinical practice.

Different clinical indications of virtual colo-
noscopy have emerged, such as when conven-
tional colonoscopy is incomplete or unfeasible,
in older and/or frail patients, when there are
alarm symptoms suggestive of CRC, for tumor
localization for laparoscopic surgery, and for
postoperative evaluation of patients with colonic
stoma. The exact role of virtual colonoscopy in
CRC screening is still under discussion. How-
ever, virtual colonoscopy is not sensitive for de-
tection of small polyps (<5 mm) and flat lesions,
although the clinical relevance of these lesions is
under debate (17).

Volumetry.—Tumor burden is an important
prognostic feature in patients with CRC. However,

744  May-June 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 4.  Rectal adenocarcinoma in a 64-year-old man. (a) Optical colonoscopic image shows a rectal tumor. (b) Endorectal ul-
trasonographic (US) image (right) with strain elastogram (left) shows tumor extension (arrows). Tumor tissue appears harder (more
blue) than the reference tissue on the elastogram. (c) Contrast-enhanced US images show tumor enhancement (arrows). (d) Fused
axial T2-weighted MR image and superimposed color-coded map derived from high-b-value DWI shows the tumor areas with re-
stricted diffusion (red). (e) Histogram from whole-tumor voxel-based analysis of the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) shows a
higher relative fraction of low ADCs (<1.0 3 10−3 mm2/sec) in the tumor. (f) DCE MR image shows a curve type 3 (left, arrow) and
extensive areas of increased volume transfer constant on the quantitative parametric map obtained from the DCE imaging performed
in the axial plane.

enables indirect evaluation of macromolecular
protein content by using the differences in the
magnetization interaction of free water protons
and macromolecularly bound protons.

Preliminary data suggest that the transfer of
magnetization will be higher in areas of fibrosis,

which are rich in macromolecules due to the
presence of collagen. Martens et al (25) sug-
gested that magnetization transfer imaging can
be helpful for discriminating between good
responders (Mandard histopathologic tumor
regression grades 1–2) and poor responders

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  745

Figure  5.  Relapsing  CRC  in  a  67-year-old  woman  in  whom  conventional  colonoscopy  was  not  feasible.
(a) Conventional axial CT image shows an endoluminal mass (arrow). (b) Virtual colonoscopy shows the tu-
mor (arrows) both in three-dimensional endoluminal virtual dissection view (left, presenting the bowel as if it
has been straightened and unfolded) and three-dimensional endoluminal view of the colon (right).

Figure 6.  T2 volumetry for the evaluation of tumor response in a 72-year-old man. (a) Before therapy, volum-
etry based on sagittal T2-weighted MR image (red) shows a large mass in the upper rectum with a volume of 95
mL. (b) After therapy, MR image shows a dramatic reduction in tumor volume (7 mL).

(tumor regression grades 3–5). Further research
is needed to establish the promising role of MR
imaging in this scenario.

Advanced Liver Imaging for
Therapy Planning in CrC
Hepatobiliary contrast media combine dynamic
and hepatocyte-specific properties and biliary
and renal excretion. On delayed hepatobiliary
phase T1-weighted MR images, lesions that lack
functional hepatocytes (eg, liver metastases) do
not retain the contrast agent. These contrast
media allow increased diagnostic accuracy and
detection of additional liver metastatic depos-
its in patients with CRC. Published studies in
which different imaging techniques were com-
pared show the highest sensitivity for MR imag-

ing with the use of hepatocyte-specific contrast
agents (26).

Patients with underlying liver disease such
as fatty liver require a larger liver remnant after
hepatectomy for metastatic disease than do pa-
tients with a normal liver. In these patients, MR
relaxometry and DCE MR imaging with hepa-
tobiliary contrast agents have shown promising
results in the assessment of global and regional
liver function and hepatic functional reserve,
respectively. Furthermore, preoperative assess-
ment with hepatobiliary contrast agents may
help identify patients at risk for liver failure after
major hepatic resection. Hepatocyte-specific
contrast agent uptake is strongly affected by
liver function. The liver-to-spleen contrast ratio
and the assessment of relative enhancement

746  May-June 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Imaging Tumor Biology in CRC with Functional and Molecular Imaging Techniques

Imaging Technique

ation Glycolysis

Oxygen-

Angio-
genesis Perfusion Proliferation

Cell

Density Apoptosis Necrosis

Molecular imaging
  FDG PET
  FLT PET
  Nitroimidazoles
  with PET*

  Hydrogen 1 MR
  spectroscopy
Functional imaging
  DCE MR imaging/

  CT/US

  Diffusion imaging
  Blood oxygen level–
  dependent MR

imaging

…
…
++

…

+

…
++

++
…
…

…

…

…
…

…
…
…

…

+

…
…

…
…
…

…

++

+†
±

…
++
…

++

…

+
…

±
±
…

…

…

++
…

…
…
…

…

…

+
…

…
…
+

…

…

++
…

Note.—FLT = fluorotymidine, ++ = clear value, + = relative value, ± = little value, … = no value.
*Nitroimidazoles include fluoroazomycin arabinoside and fluoromisonidazole.
†Intravoxel incoherent motion model.

during the hepatobiliary phase may serve as a
useful image-based test for determining regional
and global liver function (27).

Advanced MR imaging techniques that in-
clude the use of either MR spectroscopy or the
proton-density fat fraction (the fraction of mo-
bile protons in the liver attributable to fat) have
shown high potential for accurate detection and
quantification of hepatic steatosis. This param-
eter correlates with biochemically determined
liver tissue triglyceride concentration. Permutt
et al (28) reported a close correlation between
proton-density fat fraction and grade of steatosis
at histologic evaluation. MR spectroscopy is also
a valid alternative to evaluate hepatic fat frac-
tion, although it provides only a focal assess-
ment and is technically challenging. However,
the use of these MR sequences is limited to
research and not to routine practice.

Functional and
Molecular Imaging in CrC
Structural imaging techniques have shown clear
limitations in tumor evaluation. Apart from the
anatomic evaluation, increasing importance is
being placed on the noninvasive imaging as-
sessment of tumor hallmarks and the microen-
vironment of CRC. Different functional and
molecular imaging techniques such as DWI and
DCE imaging, PET, and MR spectroscopy are
transitioning to clinical practice and appear to
be useful tools for providing insights into tumor
phenotype and improving the assessment of
tumor response to treatment (3,4) (Table).

Functional Imaging
Functional imaging techniques can reveal physi-
ologic activities within tissues or organs. The
main functional techniques for use in patients
with CRC include DWI and DCE imaging.

Difusion-weighted Imaging
Diffusion refers to the random microscopic
movement of water in tissue due to thermal
collisions. DWI is an MR imaging method that
allows the in vivo and noninvasive mapping of the
diffusion process of water molecules in biologic
tissue. DWI allows evaluation of the Brownian
movement of water molecules at a microscopic
level, which is related to many different phenom-
ena in vivo. This imaging technique provides
information about tissue microstructure and
reflects cell membrane integrity and cellularity.
DWI is actually a fundamental imaging technique
in oncology and has been shown to be valuable
for tumor detection and characterization, staging,
prognosis, evaluation of response, and assess-
ment of recurrence in patients with CRC (Fig 8)
(Table E2 [online]).

Until recently, the clinical use of DWI in

patients with CRC has been based mainly on the
monoexponential model, in which water diffu-
sion behavior is presumed to be free or Brownian
diffusion. However, water proton signal attenu-
ation due to diffusion weighting in living tissue
does not decay monoexponentially in relation to
tissular complexity, with multiple interacting ele-
ments that hinder water diffusion. The deviation
from monoexponential behavior is best observed

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  747

Figure 7.  Metastasis of CRC to the liver (arrows and red lesions) in a 68-year-old patient. (a) Selected axial CT section through the
liver shows automated contour tracing of the hepatic segments by using the IntelliSpace portal before liver resection (left). The result
of semiautomatic Couinaud segmentation and tumor volume and localization is shown on the right. The left lateral segment shows
a volume of 346 mL before portal vein ligation. (b) After portal vein ligation, axial CT image through the liver shows automated
contour tracing of the hepatic segments by using the IntelliSpace portal before liver resection (left). Anatomic resection image (right)
shows the result of the surgical planning, with selection of segments to be cut. There is hypertrophy of the future liver remnant (vol-
ume, 620 mL). (c) Photograph shows surgical liver partition.

by using the non-Gaussian diffusion models,
including intravoxel incoherent motion, diffusion
kurtosis imaging, and the stretched exponential
model (29) (Table E2 [online]).

Gaussian Diffusion Model in CRC.—The mono-
exponential ADC model is the simplest possible
description of DWI signal behavior. DWI based
on this model is currently a basic tool in abdomi-
nal and pelvic MR imaging. Signal from water
molecules decays exponentially with the use of
increasing b values. The higher the b value, the
stronger the diffusion effects, and increasing the
b value attenuates the signal from many struc-
tures and lesions. However, malignant tumors are
usually more cellular and have a more complex
extravascular-extracellular space than do benign
tumors and normal tissue, causing lower attenu-
ation of the signal in tumors, with increased b val-
ues. This feature usually improves tumor detec-
tion and sometimes characterization with DWI.
In the case of CRC, DWI is a highly accurate
technique for detecting tumor lesions (30). How-
ever, although DWI has the advantage of higher
contrast resolution, it still is hampered by lower
spatial resolution compared with T2-weighted

imaging. Thus, simultaneous use of both data
sets provides better results for tumor delineation.
Quantitative parameters of the diffusion also can
be useful for tumor characterization. The ADC,
which is essentially the absolute line slope value
of the exponential decrease in signal intensity on
diffusion images, may be a potential noninvasive
biomarker of CRC tumor aggressiveness, and it
also may be useful for distinguishing poorly differ-
entiated from well-differentiated tumors, allowing
prediction of the degree of extramural depth inva-
sion, mesorectal fascia and lymph node status, and
evaluation of response to therapy in CRC tumors
(31–33) (Fig 9). The use of whole-body DWI may
be an attractive alternative for staging or detecting
relapsing tumors in patients with CRC (34,35).

Many authors have explored the use of DWI
for prediction of tumor response in patients with
CRC, with controversial results. Some study
results suggested a significant correlation of the
pretreatment mean ADC with the response, while
others did not confirm this relationship (19,36).
Concerning the role of ADC in the evaluation of
tumor response, DWI showed significantly better
results for tumor restaging compared with stan-
dard morphologic sequences.

748  May-June 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 8.  DWI for tumor detection in a 56-year-old man with a relapsing rectal tumor. (a) Sagittal T2-weighted
MR image does not adequately show the tumor extension. (b) Sagittal diffusion-weighted image at a high b
value (b = 1000 sec/mm2) clearly shows the tumor (arrows). DWI has the advantage of higher contrast resolution
but is still hampered by lower spatial resolution compared with T2-weighted imaging. Thus, simultaneous use
of both data sets provides better results for tumor delineation. DWI is an accurate technique for detecting CRC.

Figure 9.  ADCs in the evaluation
of tumor response in a 76-year-old
man with RC. (a) Pretherapy sagit-
tal  ADC  map  and  volumetry  (left,
blue) and corresponding histogram
(right) show a large RC (volume, 95
mL) with a low mean ADC (0.937
3  10−3  mm2/sec).  (b)  Posttherapy
image  (left)  and  histogram  (right)
show  reduced  volume  of  15  mL
and  increased  ADCs  (mean  ADC,
1.232 3 10−3 mm2/sec).

Results of many published studies have sug-
gested that ADC is useful for distinguishing good
responders from poor responders; however, a re-
cent systematic analysis (37) showed the limited
accuracy of imaging methods to confirm a patho-
logic complete response in patients with RC. In

this study, DWI and FDG PET/CT showed the
greatest potential for the assessment of patho-
logic complete response, but both modalities
demonstrated limitations. This point is especially
important because organ preservation strategies
in the management of RC treated with radiation

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  749

therapy and chemotherapy have gained inter-
est. However, clinical and radiologic assessment
of tumor response currently does not allow the
accurate identification of patients with pathologic
complete response after neoadjuvant therapy.

Perhaps the major strength of imaging tech-

niques including DWI is in the identification
of nonresponders (38). DWI also may allow
differentiation of locally relapsing RC from scar
tissue. Grosu et al (39) showed that a cutoff
ADC of 1.34 3 10−3 mm2/sec produced sensitiv-
ity, specificity, and accuracy of 93%, 91%, and
92%, respectively.

Non-Gaussian Diffusion Models in CRC.—Non-
Gaussian models were proposed to reflect and
evaluate more closely the distribution of water
molecular diffusion in human tissue and thus to
allow the more realistic physiologic and patho-
logic characteristics of in vivo tissue to be pro-
filed, such as cellularity, microcirculation, and
heterogeneity. The clinical value of these models
continues to be under research.

Intravoxel incoherent motion is a diffusion

model that allows separate quantification of
tissue diffusivity and tissue capillary perfusion.
Diffusion at low b values (<200 sec/mm2) is
significantly affected by perfusion in the normal
capillary network but also by other physiologic
processes such as glandular secretion and duc-
tal flow (40). In patients with RC, preliminary
results also suggest that the diffusion coefficient
and perfusion fraction might be correlated with
microvessel density (41), although a correlation
between intravoxel incoherent motion–related
parameters and DCE parameters is controversial.
Intravoxel incoherent motion also may be
useful in RC staging.Yu et al (42) reported that
metastatic lymph nodes exhibited significantly
lower diffusion and pseudodiffusion coefficients
than did nonmetastatic lymph nodes. Finally,
the main use of intravoxel incoherent motion in
patients with CRC is focused on evaluation of
tumor response (Fig 10). Intravoxel incoherent
motion–related parameters were useful for early
prediction of response after chemotherapy for
CRC metastasis to the liver (43) and reflected
early changes to antiangiogenic therapy (44),
although some of the intravoxel incoherent
motion–derived parameters have shown limited
reproducibility.

Diffusion kurtosis imaging is a different
model that includes the assumption of non-
Gaussian diffusion behavior of water at very
high b values. The diffusion kurtosis imaging
model provides more information on tissue
structure, reflecting the complexity and hetero-
geneity of the tissue. This imaging technique of-

fers different quantitative parameters, including
the apparent kurtosis coefficient and the ADC,
corrected to account for the observed non-
Gaussian behavior of diffusion (45) (Fig 11).
To our knowledge, the use of diffusion kur-
tosis imaging in patients with CRC has been
limited. However, diffusion kurtosis imaging
may be better than standard DWI parameters
for discrimination of RC with distant metasta-
ses from those without metastases. Yu et al (46)
reported that the ADC was lower in tumors
associated with distant metastases. Diffusion
kurtosis MR imaging−related parameters also
may be useful for predicting tumor response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radiation ther-
apy. Good responders (patients with a Mandard
tumor regression grade of 1–2) show lower 10th
percentile ADCs before therapy than do poor
responders (47).

The stretched exponential model may pro-
vide an approximation of the intravoxel diffusion
heterogeneity and allows the quantification of the
distributed diffusion coefficient and the hetero-
geneity index. The stretching parameter is linked
to heterogeneity of the diffusion process within
each voxel and is an evaluation of the deviation of
the signal attenuation from the monoexponential
behavior. The use of the stretched exponential
model is limited in patients with CRC. This tech-
nique may be used as a potential optimal model
for characterization of CRC. The distributed
diffusion coefficient showed good accuracy (area
under the curve, 0.980) for differentiating tumor
from normal rectal wall tissue (48).

DCE Imaging Techniques
DCE imaging techniques provide information
related to tumor vessel function (perfusion,
permeability) and extracellular-extravascular
space composition by allowing assessment of
the changes in signal intensity over time af-
ter intravenous injection of a contrast agent
(Table E3 [online]). However, published data
are contradictory concerning the capability of
imaging to reflect angiogenesis or its surrogated
markers (eg, microvessel density) in patients
with CRC (49). In clinical practice, the main
DCE techniques in body imaging are based on
MR imaging and CT. DCE measures are totally
dependent on the analysis model and imaging
technique applied. These features limit the in-
dexes and biologically relevant parameters that
can be obtained.

Authors of different studies have established

several general principles concerning angio-
genesis and CRC. First, more poorly perfused
tumors usually have a poorer outcome. Second,
baseline perfusion is significantly higher in

750  May-June 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 10.  RC in a 57-year-old man. (a) Axial T2-weighted image shows an RC mass extending to the mesorectal fat (arrow).
(b) Perfusion fraction parametric map of the tumor in the axial plane. Perfusion fraction and coefficient of true diffusion (not
shown) of the tumor were 36% and 630 sec/mm2, respectively. (c) Before therapy, the curve of signal intensity decay in diffu-
sion showed marked attenuation of signal at low b values (arrow) because of the influence of tumor perfusion and reflected non-
Gaussian diffusion behavior. (d–f) After radiation therapy and chemotherapy, there were subtle changes on the T2-weighted
image (d), reduced values of perfusion (16%) (e) and increased coefficients of true diffusion (1396 sec/mm2) (not shown), and
changes in the morphology of the curve (f).

responders than in nonresponders to different
types of therapies. And last, an early reduction
in vascular parameters after therapy usually
is associated with improved patient outcome
(49). DCE techniques may add clinical value
in different clinical scenarios in patients with

CRC, including diagnosis, prognosis, prediction,
evaluation of tumor response to therapy, and
detection of relapsing tumors. However, out-
side of academic centers, there are likely to be
few radiologists who are familiar with perfusion
imaging in clinical practice.

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  751

Figure  11.  Polypoid  rectal  mass  in  a  51-year-old
man. (a) Axial T2-weighted image shows a polypoid
rectal mass (arrow). Diffusion kurtosis imaging of the
tumor was performed. (b, c) Parametric maps of the
apparent  kurtosis  (b)  and  diffusion  coefficients  in-
cluding the correction of non-Gaussianity (c) of the
tumor (arrow) in the axial plane are shown.

DCE MR Imaging.—DCE MR imaging for the
evaluation of CRC is usually performed by
using a contrast-enhanced three-dimensional
gradient-echo T1-weighted sequence. Prelimi-
nary results have shown an association between
different DCE MR imaging parameters and
angiogenic and genetic markers in patients with
RC. Yeo et al (50) found that the mean return
rate constant values were correlated with mi-
crovessel density and tumor stage, while epider-
mal growth factor receptor−positive RC dis-
played higher mean volume transfer constants.
Lollert et al (51) also reported that a significant
correlation was found between time to peak
and the expression of epidermal growth factor
receptor. Finally, DCE MR imaging quanti-
tative and semiquantitative parameters have
been correlated with tumor and node staging
(52,53). Conversely, no significant correlations
were found with two main biomarkers in CRC:
Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog
(K-ras) and microsatellite instability (52).

To date and to our knowledge, DCE MR
imaging has been used predominantly in pa-
tients with CRC for tumor response assessment.
Experience with the use of DCE MR imaging
for prediction of RC response to treatment and
the prognostic value of this technique are still

unclear. Some authors have reported an asso-
ciation between posttreatment volume transfer
constant values and pathologic complete re-
sponse status, while others were unable to find
any correlation (19,54–56). Perhaps a possible
explanation for these contradictory results may
be in the differences in the basic aspects of DCE
examinations, such as the selection of different
pharmacokinetic models or arterial input func-
tion calculations.

Finally, DCE MR imaging was also useful
for prognostic evaluation. Good responders to
preoperative radiation therapy and chemotherapy
showed higher pretherapy volume transfer constant
values than those of poor responders (Fig 4f).

Perfusion CT.—Perfusion CT allows evaluation
of tumor vasculature in vivo by modeling tracer
kinetics. To our knowledge, only small studies of
perfusion CT in patients with CRC have been
performed, and the data suggest that perfusion
parameters may have a role in tumor phenotyp-
ing, assessment of tumor vascular heterogeneity,
prognostication, and response assessment (49)
(Fig 12). However, correlation of perfusion CT−
related parameters (eg, blood flow and perme-
ability) with  microvessel density remains con-
flicted in CRC (57,58).

752  May-June 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 12.  High-grade rectal ad-
enocarcinoma with heterogeneous
perfusion  in  a  77-year-old  man.
Perfusion  CT  blood  volume  para-
metric  map  (left)  shows  a  tumor
with  combined  areas  of  increased
blood  volume  (red  and  yellow
pixels) and necrotic or poorly per-
fused  areas  (blue  pixels).  Highly
vascularized  areas  show  a  type  3
time-attenuation  curve  (red  ar-
row),  while  poorly  vascularized
and/or necrotic zones of the tumor
show a flat time-attenuation curve
(white arrow).

Figure 13.  Response evaluation of advanced RC at perfusion CT in a 73-year-old man. (a) Pretherapy axial
fusion  image  combining  conventional  CT  and  a  blood  flow  parametric  map  shows  intense  tumor  perfusion
(blood flow, 95 mL/min/100 g). This feature suggests a possible good response to therapy. (b) Axial fusion im-
age combining conventional CT and a blood flow parametric map obtained 8 weeks after radiation therapy and
chemotherapy shows significant blood flow reduction in the lesion (blood flow, 32 mL/min/100 g).

Published data concerning the role of perfu-
sion CT for tumor characterization suggest that
perfusion CT parameters may be correlated with
tumor grade and the degree of tumor differentia-
tion. Xu et al (59) reported that blood flow and
time to peak on perfusion CT images is associ-
ated with tumor grade. Sun et al (60) reported
that mean blood flow was significantly different
among well-, moderately, and poorly differenti-
ated tumors. Perfusion CT also can be a prog-
nostic tool. More poorly perfused tumors have a
poorer outcome (49,61,62).

Published studies on tumor response assess-
ment that were focused on the vascular effect of
neoadjuvant therapy in patients with primary RC
have demonstrated a reduction of 40% or more
in blood flow, blood volume, and permeability
in patients who respond to therapy (49,61) (Fig
13). However, perfusion CT has shown limited
accuracy for assessment of complete pathologic

response. Besides, the vascular effect of therapies
is variable and depends on the mechanism of
action of the therapy and the timing (eg, an early
temporal increase in perfusion can be depicted
in treated RC secondary to radiation-induced
inflammatory changes).

Finally, a further area of investigation is the
possibility of a combined analysis of perfusion
CT and PET parameters, which would allow
better assessment of tumor phenotypes and
intratumoral heterogeneity on the basis of the
combination of perfusion-related parameters and
metabolism (63,64).

DCE US.—The introduction of intravenous con-
trast agents at US has been a major development
for the practice of US, enabling perfusion quan-
tification with the use of postprocessing software
(Fig 4c) (Movie 2). However, for CRC, there is
only limited information on the role of DCE US.

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  753

Figure  14.
Imaging  of  tumor  oxygenation.
Axial  gradient-echo  MR  images  fused  with
color-coded  maps  (top  row)  derived  from  T2*-
weighted  MR  imaging  performed  before  and
10 and 15 minutes after oxygen administration
(top, left to right) show blood oxygen level–de-
pendent signal intensity change after administra-
tion  of  oxygen  in  an  RC.  The  increasing  signal
intensity  on  sequential  blood  oxygen  level–de-
pendent images represents increased tumor oxy-
genation. Note the decrease in signal intensity at
20 minutes, which is secondary to a decrease in
oxygen exchange due to tumor saturation.

Zhuang et al (65) showed that the area under the
curve (an indirect indicator of blood volume) cor-
related with microvessel density, tumor grade, and
tumor stage and was significantly higher in adeno-
carcinomas than in adenomas. DCE US was also
useful in monitoring changes in vascularization of
liver metastases in patients under treatment. How-
ever, the utility of DCE US was limited mainly to
cases with relatively high perfusion at baseline or
marked changes secondary to therapy (66).

Unfortunately, none of these DCE imaging
techniques has been introduced in routine clini-
cal practice yet, because they feature different
technical approaches, complexity of the mea-
surements, and limited reproducibility. How-
ever, they highlight important biologic features
in tumors, and it is conceivable that they will be
part of daily practice in the near future.

Functional Imaging of Hypoxia and
Oxygenation in CRC
Tumor hypoxia has a key role in tumor aggressive-
ness and is a major cause of metastatic spread, fail-
ure of tumor control, resistance to therapy, tumor
recurrence, and poor patient outcome. However,
in spite of its importance, imaging evaluation of
hypoxia in patients with CRC, to our knowledge,
has been scarce in the literature, probably because
of technical complexity, and is limited to research
studies. Oxygen-enhanced MR imaging (R1
contrast) and blood oxygen level–dependent MR
imaging (R2* contrast) have the potential to allow
noninvasive investigation of tumor oxygenation
and hypoxia (Fig 14).

Oxygen-enhanced MR imaging allows quanti-
fication of the distribution of tumor oxygen deliv-
ery in vivo. This technique may allow assessment
of changes in oxygenation in tumors and normal

tissue. Oxygen inhalation produces significant
signal intensity change in well-oxygenated tumors
with increasing longitudinal relaxation rates
(R1). O’Connor et al (67) showed evidence
that oxygen-enhanced MR imaging was able to
demonstrate significant oxygen-induced changes
in R1 in patients with various gastrointestinal
malignancies, including CRC.

Blood oxygen level–dependent MR imaging
may allow evaluation of tumor oxygenation on
the basis of endogenous deoxyhemoglobin as a
contrast agent (Table E4 [online]). Deoxygenated
blood appears darker on T2* images than does
oxygenated blood. Blood oxygen level–dependent
imaging is a challenging imaging technique in the
abdomen, and it tends to represent acute more
than chronic hypoxia. Goh et al (64) evaluated
the perfusion-metabolic phenotype of CRCs.
They found that tumors with a low-flow and
high-metabolism phenotype were associated with
higher levels of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-
1a), a marker of hypoxia.

Functional Imaging of
Lymph nodes in CrC
The presence of nodal metastases has both thera-
peutic and prognostic implications in patients
with CRC. Characterization of lymph nodes is
always challenging for radiologists. Currently, size
(ie, short axis) and morphologic criteria (eg, con-
tour and signal intensity heterogeneity) are used
to evaluate lymph nodes with variable accuracy,
because malignant disease may be present, even
in very small lymph nodes.

DWI has shown good sensitivity for detecting
lymph nodes, and it seems to be a good predictor
of yN0 status after radiation therapy and chemo-
therapy (68). However, DWI or the combination

754  May-June 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  15.  MR  lymphography  with  ul-
trasmall  superparamagnetic  iron  oxide
nanoparticles in a patient with rectal ad-
enocarcinoma.  T2*-weighted  MR  image
and  photomicrograph  of  the  surgical
specimen  show  a  nonmetastatic  meso-
rectal  lymph  node  (4  mm)  (arrow,  left)
with  low  signal  intensity.  Ultrasmall  su-
perparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles
are  taken  up  by  macrophages  in  normal
nodes, causing decreased signal intensity
on T2*-weighted images.

of T2-weighted MR imaging and DWI showed low
to moderate sensitivity and specificity for detect-
ing metastatic involvement, and the diagnostic
performance of ADCs for identifying malignant
lymph nodes was limited (68,69). MR imaging
with lymph node–specific contrast agents showed
good diagnostic performance for the assessment of
lymph node tumor involvement.

Ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles are taken up by macrophages
in normal lymph nodes, causing a decrease
in signal intensity on T2- and T2*-weighted
MR images (Fig 15). In comparison, nodes
with malignancy replacing normal cells do not
uptake ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide
nanoparticles (Table E4 [online]). Lymphotropic
nanoparticles have shown moderate to high
accuracy for identification of malignant lymph
nodes, including normal-sized lymph nodes in
different tumor types (70).

Unfortunately, ultrasmall superparamagnetic

iron oxide nanoparticle contrast agents were
withdrawn from use in clinical practice. At pres-
ent, there is no imaging technique that yields
clinical results similar to those with ultrasmall
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for
detection of small metastatic lymph nodes. Re-
cently, they have been reintroduced in Europe
for clinical use in patients with prostate cancer,
and there are plans to use them for imaging
other types of cancer (71).

DCE MR imaging behavior also may be use-
ful for lymph node characterization. Vag et al (72)
evaluated the type of signal intensity curve in lymph
nodes. These authors observed that the percentage
of continuously (persistent curve, type 1) enhancing
voxels in malignant lymph nodes was significantly
higher than that in benign lymph nodes. Yu et al
(73) studied the value of quantitative parameters
and reported that the volume transfer constant and
the extracellular-extravascular space values showed
differences between metastatic and nonmetastatic
lymph nodes in patients with RC.

Finally, some authors evaluated the use of gado-
fosveset (a gadolinium chelate with a long intravas-

cular half-life) and found that nonmalignant lymph
nodes showed uptake of gadofosveset and enhanced
like vessels, while malignant lymph nodes showed
less enhancement (74). However, regardless of the
imaging technique used, evaluation of lymph nodes
is challenging and shows limited accuracy, mainly
because the presence of micrometastases cannot be
ruled out in a consistent manner.

Molecular Imaging

Molecular imaging techniques enable the visu-
alization, characterization, and quantification
of biologic processes at molecular or cellular
levels. FDG PET is the main molecular imaging
technique in clinical practice for the evaluation of
patients with CRC.

Positron Emission Tomography
PET constitutes major progress in the treat-
ment of cancer. To date, in addition to the classic
radiotracer, 18F FDG, various other new tracers
are gaining interest for the assessment of different
tumor metabolic pathways, although limited use
of these radiotracers in clinical practice has been
reported (Table E5 [online]).

FDG PET.—Aerobic glycolysis, the alteration of
energetic metabolism in tumors, is based on an
increased glycolytic capacity, even in the pres-
ence of high oxygen concentration. Malignant
tumors generally consume glucose at a high rate,
which is the basis for clinical PET. PET/CT is an
established technique for decision making that
may have a significant clinical effect in various
stages of the disease in patients with CRC (75).
FDG PET/CT is more sensitive than CT alone
for evaluation of apparently limited metastatic
disease before intervention or the presence of
extrahepatic disease, which may improve staging
to avoid unnecessary surgery.

However, there is insufficient scientific evi-
dence to recommend the routine use of FDG
PET/CT in the preoperative staging of CRC,
because PET also shows several limitations (76)
(Fig 16). First, FDG uptake depends on several

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  755

Figure  16.  Whole-body  imaging  in  a  58-year-
old woman with stage IV CRC. Maximum inten-
sity  projections  of  18F  FDG  PET  (a)  and  whole-
body DWI (b) allow evaluation of whole-tumor
burden.  Both  techniques  show  multiple  pul-
monary,  liver,  and  lymphatic  metastases  (ar-
rows),  although  lung  metastases  are  difficult  to
depict  with  DWI.  However,  conventional  imag-
ing  sequences  (not  shown)  may  improve  their
evaluation.

features, including tumor grade, type of tumor
involvement, and histologic type (ie, FDG PET is
limited in the evaluation of mucinous tumors and
peritoneal involvement, particularly in hypocel-
lular lesions with abundant mucin) (77) (Fig
17). Second, PET shows limited spatial resolu-
tion, which may cause small lesions to be missed.
Third, this technique likely will not allow detec-
tion of residual masses containing very few tumor
cells in fibrotic tissue after neoadjuvant radiation
therapy and chemotherapy.

In this situation, a complete metabolic re-
sponse might not correspond to a pathologic
complete response, which is predictive of overall
survival in patients with RC. A recent meta-
analysis (78) about the predictive value of FDG
PET for evaluating tumor response to neoad-
juvant therapy supported the use of FDG PET
for restaging locally advanced RC after radiation
therapy and chemotherapy. However, this analysis
included studies with both pathologic complete
response and major response (tumor regression
grade 2 according to Mandard classification and
tumor regression grade 3 according to Dworak
classification) as the reference standard.

PET also has a role in the follow-up of treated

patients with rising serum carcinoembryonic
antigen levels without detectable disease at
morphologic imaging. Abnormal serum carci-
noembryonic antigen levels also are observed in
patients with a variety of benign conditions. Sev-
eral studies have demonstrated the value of FDG
PET in patients with rising serum carcinoembry-
onic antigen levels and no identifiable lesions at
conventional imaging (79).

In addition, the use of PET would be indi-
cated in the preoperative staging of recurrent
CRC in patients being considered for resection.
The use of PET/CT in these clinical situations
may prevent unnecessary surgery by allowing
unresectable disease to be excluded, clarifying
doubtful conventional imaging features, and
guiding therapy (80). Finally, the prognostic
value of quantitative PET parameters associated
with overall survival in patients with primary and
recurrent CRC has been demonstrated, and PET
also has shown high accuracy in the early predic-
tion of response during therapy (81).

The introduction to clinical imaging of PET/
MR imaging machines may open new horizons
in the imaging evaluation of CRC. PET/MR
imaging can provide anatomic, functional, and
metabolic imaging of tumors, improving tu-
mor staging (82). PET/MR imaging has several
advantages compared with PET/CT, including
the lack of ionizing radiation and the functional
information DWI and DCE MR imaging offer,
but at the cost of longer examination times (83).

To date, there is limited clinical experi-
ence in use of PET/MR imaging in patients
with CRC. However, PET/MR imaging has
demonstrated higher accuracy than PET/CT
in patients with CRC for the detection of liver
metastases and tumor staging of RC, while the
rate of detection of lung nodules with PET/MR
imaging is currently lower than that with PET/
CT (83,84). PET/MR imaging may improve
tumor characterization, staging, and treatment
monitoring in patients with CRC; however,
larger clinical validation studies are needed

756  May-June 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 17.  Limitations of PET in a 69-year-old man with a history of a mucinous rectal tumor and in-
creased carcinoembryonic antigen values. (a) Maximum intensity projection 18F-FDG PET image shows
no abnormality. (b) Axial CT image depicts a tumor deposit (arrow). PET is limited in the evaluation of
mucinous tumors, particularly hypocellular lesions with abundant mucin.

to make PET/MR imaging an integral part of
patient treatment in the near future.

Non-FDG PET.—A growing number of non-FDG
PET radiotracers are under research in patients with
CRC. FLT is a radiotracer that allows the evaluation
of cellular proliferation. There are contradictory data
concerning the value of FLT PET in patients with
CRC. Nakajo et al (85) did not find any advantage
of the use of FLT for CRC tumor detection and
staging. FLT showed the same potential that FDG
did at PET/CT for the diagnosis of primary tumors
and nodal foci in patients with CRC.

However, high physiologic uptake of the tracer
in the liver can limit its utility in patients with liver
metastases. Furthermore, FLT PET demonstrated
less sensitivity than did FDG PET for the detec-
tion and staging of CRC and did not seem to
be a promising method for assessment of tumor
response to radiation therapy and chemotherapy
in patients with RC (86–88). Conversely, Rendl et
al (89) reported that negative posttreatment FLT
studies allowed identification of more histopatho-
logic responders to radiation therapy and chemo-
therapy in patients with RC than did FDG PET.
The combination of multiple PET radiotrac-
ers may enable insights into tumor biology. Wang
et al (90) showed that combining FDG with
FLT PET may improve phenotype evaluation
in patients with CRC. These authors suggested
that a pattern of high uptake of both FDG and
FLT may reflect poorer outcomes with reduced
survival and a higher rate of metastasis.

To our knowledge, imaging evaluation of
CRC with other radiotracers has been scarce in

the published literature and focused mainly on
the study of hypoxia, which negatively affects
response to therapy (87,91,92). The results of a
small study (92) suggest that PET with hypoxia-
related radiotracers may be predictive of survival
and tumor response to neoadjuvant therapy in
patients with RC.

Mr Spectroscopy
MR spectroscopy allows the analysis and quan-
tification of metabolic changes associated with
cancer, which are dependent on tumor type
(Table E5 [online]). An increased choline peak (a
marker of cellular membrane turnover) indicates
high cellularity or cell destruction, while lipid
peaks usually are seen with necrotic tumors.
To our knowledge, clinical experience with
MR spectroscopy in the evaluation of CRC is
scarce. Different features limit the quality of a
spectroscopic examination in vivo in CRC lesions,
including bowel peristalsis, spectral contamina-
tion, limited spatial resolution, or magnetic field
distortions and susceptibility effects from nearby
air-tissue interfaces. Authors of published articles
(93,94) have demonstrated the presence of choline
and lipid peaks in patients with RC (Fig 18). Kim
et al (95) also reported that the choline peak at 3.2
ppm in patients with RC disappeared after radia-
tion therapy and chemotherapy, while the lipid
peak persisted at 1.3 ppm.

Hyperpolarized MR spectroscopy may al-
low improved visualization of the biochemical
pathways of normal and abnormal metabolism,
but, to our knowledge, no clinical data in patients
with CRC have been published.

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  757

Figure 18.  MR spectroscopy in a
63-year-old  man  with  RC.  Single-
voxel  MR  spectrum  of  the  tumor
shows increased choline (Cho) and
lipid (Lip) peaks in the mass.

Multiparametric Imaging in CrC
From a theoretical point of view, multiple combina-
tions of noninvasive in vivo imaging techniques can
be used to assess the evolution of cancer hallmarks.
Single-parameter measurements do not reflect
tumor heterogeneity, and a combined analysis of
different parameters would be expected to provide
complementary information for prediction of tumor
response, prognosis, and biologic characterization
of CRC (Fig 4d, 4e). Although a wide range of im-
aging techniques is available, not many functional
or molecular imaging markers have gained wide
acceptance in standard practice, and their exact
roles are under research. Authors of diverse stud-
ies (63,64,95–100) have analyzed the relationships
between functional parameters and metabolism in
CRC phenotyping.

 The relationship between tumor perfusion and

metabolism (the vascular-metabolic phenotype)
is an important feature in CRC tumors. As a
general rule, perfusion and metabolism are more
likely to be coupled in early-stage than in late-
stage cancer; however, van Laarhoven et al (95)
demonstrated an inverse relationship between
tumor vascularization (based on values of the rate
constant, Kep) and metabolism (FDG uptake)
in metastases of CRC to the liver. However, this
does not seem to be the case in primary CRC.
Goh et al (63) found a correlation between tu-
mor blood flow and metabolism for high tumor
stages (III and IV) but not for low-stage tumors
in patients with CRC. Jansenn et al (96) reported
that highly perfused rectal tumors manifested
with higher FDG-uptake levels compared with
low-perfusion tumors.

Some authors have suggested a possible expla-
nation for this feature. CRC does not necessarily
manifest with necrotic areas as the tumor grows
and frequently is associated with an intense
inflammatory response, which may increase esti-
mated perfusion. Thus, the uncoupling of perfu-
sion and metabolism may not occur as the tumor
grows (63,64). Goh et al (64) showed that a
mismatch between low flow and high metabolism
may represent an adaptive angiogenic response
to hypoxia and suggested that this feature may
be relevant in the consideration of additional
therapy for these patients.

Multiparametric imaging may be a useful tool
for tumor characterization and prediction of his-
topathologic tumor response. Changes in the flow
and metabolic phenotype (expressed as perfusion
blood flow 3 maximum standardized uptake
value) showed high accuracy for prediction of
histopathologic response to radiation therapy and
chemotherapy when a cutoff value of −75% is
used in patients with RC (98).

Different authors also have studied the rela-
tionship between tumor ADCs and FDG uptake
(standardized uptake values) and found a signifi-
cant negative correlation between the parameters
in adenocarcinomas of the rectum (97,98).

In the future, combining anatomic and func-
tional capabilities of MR imaging with molecu-
lar PET information may help improve CRC
phenotyping, staging, prediction of response to
treatment, and treatment assessment compared
with the use of conventional imaging modalities.
However, to our knowledge there is currently
limited evidence on the diagnostic performance

758  May-June 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

and advantages of multiparametric imaging with
PET/MR imaging (82–84,100,101).

On the other hand, multiparametric imag-
ing that combines functional (DWI and DCE
MR imaging) and metabolic (MR spectroscopy)
imaging techniques is an attractive option for cor-
relation of different biologic parameters. Pham et
al (19) reviewed the potential of DWI and DCE
MR imaging and found that a limited number of
studies have been performed to assess the role of
DWI and DCE imaging for management of CRC.
Nie et al (102) explored the specific relationship of
pre−chemotherapy and radiation therapy multi-
parametric MR imaging values and prediction of
pathologic complete response. Unfortunately, the
role of multiparametric imaging has been evalu-
ated mainly in an experimental setting with a lack
of adequate standardization. Larger multicenter
prospective studies are needed to evaluate the real
clinical utility of multiparametric imaging (56).

In addition, published articles about the use of
multiparametric imaging in patients with CRC are
focused mainly on determining which techniques
perform best for assessment of response to therapy.
De Cecco et al (103) did not analyze the incremen-
tal value of combined multiparametric imaging.
They found only that pretreatment kurtosis based
on the analysis of T2-weighted MR images and
the extracellular-extravascular volume fraction, Ve,
derived from perfusion MR imaging were the most
effective parameters for differentiating RC with
pathologic complete response to radiation therapy
and chemotherapy. Intven et al (54) also explored
the value of combined T2-weighted volumetry and
DWI and DCE MR imaging for the prediction of
pathologic response after radiation therapy and
chemotherapy in locally advanced RC. This group
showed that ADC change is a promising diagnostic
tool for evaluating response, while DCE imaging of-
fered no additional diagnostic value compared with
DWI alone. Attenberger et al (104) also reported
similar findings.

Imaging of Tumor heterogeneity
and Complexity
Heterogeneity is a hallmark of malignant tumors
and manifests at different levels (eg, phenotypic,
physiologic, and genomic levels). Spatial and
temporal heterogeneity is found between different
tumors and within each lesion. Intratumor hetero-
geneity changes over time and tends to increase
as tumors grow. Tumor heterogeneity also has
prognostic importance and may influence response
to therapy.

Imaging can allow quantification and represen-

tation of the spatial variation of structural, func-
tional, and/or molecular parameters (6) (Table
E5 [online]). The linking of these imaging-related

parameters to different phenotypes or genotypes
can allow the mapping of biologic heterogeneity of
tumors, from which inference on gene expression,
signaling pathway activity, and tumor microen-
vironment features can be obtained. Multiple
combinations of different imaging techniques can
be used for assessing and quantifying intratumoral
heterogeneity. The same imaging data can be
used to measure conventional clinical parameters
(eg, size), functional-molecular parameters (eg,
standardized uptake value), and also the various
heterogeneity-based metrics.

There are different imaging-based methods
of measuring intratumor spatial heterogeneity,
including qualitative assessment of heterogene-
ity (eg, shape, contour, areas of differentiated
enhancement or uptake), quantitative evaluation
based on parametric maps, evaluation of param-
eter distributions (histogram analysis), quanti-
fication of spatial complexity (texture or fractal
analysis), or delineation of tumor subregions
(parcellation) (6,7). Unfortunately, the biologic
processes represented by these imaging tech-
niques usually remain unclear. To date, the main
techniques for assessing tumor heterogeneity in
patients with CRC include histogram analysis, tex-
ture analysis, fractal analysis, and DWI techniques.

histogram Analysis
Histogram analysis is a method that can be used
to analyze the distribution of signal intensity in
a tumor to describe its heterogeneity. Multiple
histogram descriptors such as kurtosis, skewness,
standard deviation, percentile values, and percent-
age of voxels above or below certain cutoff values
can be measured (Fig 4e). Manual measurement
of parameter values based on a region of interest
can result in sampling errors and incorrect true
tumoral assessment. A volumetric pixel-by-pixel
analysis has been suggested to be more accurate.
ADC histogram analysis may be helpful for

predicting pathologic complete response in
patients with RC by comparing mean ADCs
(105–107). In addition, first-order statistics based
on histogram analysis of PET examinations were
correlated with conventional measurements (eg,
standardized uptake value and metabolic volume)
and RAS mutation status (107,108).

Texture Analysis
Medical images contain more useful information
than may be perceived with simple visual inspec-
tion. The assessment of imaging texture features,
describing and quantifying the spatial distribution
and heterogeneity of voxel intensities, may improve
clinical practice in CRC (Fig 19). Although there
is not a clear biologic correlation of texture analysis
parameters, different texture indexes have shown

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  759

Figure 19.  Texture analysis of RC
in  a  68-year-old  man.  Left:  Axial
MR  image  shows  segmented  tu-
mor (red) and a control area (blue)
for comparison. Right: Histograms
show  first-order  statistics  (entropy
and  homogeneity)  of  the  tumor
and the control element.

correlation with conventional indexes, such as
standardized uptake values and metabolic volume
derived from PET examinations (108).

Texture analysis may allow better tissue charac-
terization in patients with CRC. Wagner et al (109)
found evidence that skewness and kurtosis based
on contrast-enhanced CT and on PET/CT images
show differences between primary CRC and liver
metastases in patients with metastatic disease. Tex-
ture analysis also may be useful for distinguishing
hyperplastic polyps from tubular or tubulovillous
adenomas and adenocarcinomas (110).

There are preliminary data related to the
use of texture analysis in CRC staging. CT-
based entropy and uniformity of the appar-
ently disease-free liver may allow CRC patients
with and without metastatic liver disease to be
distinguished (111). ADC texture analysis also
may be a useful predictor of tumor staging in
patients with RC. Skewness, entropy, and con-
trast based on ADC texture analysis of patients
with RC were significantly lower in patients with
stage pT1–2 versus those with stage pT3–4, and
entropy was an independent predictor of nodal
status (pN0 vs pN1–2) (112).

In the evaluation of lymph nodes, Cui et al
(113) reported that CT texture evaluation of
lymph nodes in patients with CRC demonstrated
greater heterogeneity in malignant nodes. More-
over, texture analysis features from contrast-
enhanced CT and T2-weighted MR imaging may
be promising indicators of patient survival and
tumor response to different therapies in patients
with CRC (114–116). However, texture analy-
sis shows clear limitations (ie, texture features
depend on factors unrelated to the biology of the
lesion), which is the reason why published results
sometimes appear to be contradictory.

Fractal Analysis
Fractals represent any type of infinitely scaled and
repeated pattern. Fractals can be physical forms or
spatial or temporal patterns. Fractal analysis is a
technique suitable for the quantification of spatial
heterogeneity and characterization of complex
systems that are hard to describe by using con-
ventional features (eg, size or shape). Promising
results have been obtained by applying fractal
analysis in the diagnosis, staging, phenotypic eval-
uation, prognosis, and assessment of the response
to therapy in patients with CRC (117,118).

DWI and heterogeneity
Both diffusion kurtosis imaging and the stretched
exponential model, two nonmonoexponential
models of DWI analysis, allow an imaging ap-
proach to tumor heterogeneity. Diffusion kurtosis
imaging can better reflect the microstructural
complexity and heterogeneity of the tissue than
monoexponential analysis can, but kurtosis-de-
rived parameters do not have easy biophysic and
biologic interpretation. Apparent kurtosis coef-
ficients close to 0 indicate a Gaussian distribution
and suggest tissue homogeneity. As a general rule,
apparent kurtosis coefficients usually are between
0 and 1 in normal tissue, but they are usually
greater than 1 in tumors (45).

Preliminary results suggest that apparent

kurtosis coefficients may improve the assessment
of tumor histologic grade and may help to predict
lymph node staging in patients with RC. Kurtosis
was significantly higher in high-grade than in low-
grade RC, and this parameter showed better perfor-
mance for discrimination of tumor grade than with
conventional ADC. Tumors associated with positive
lymph nodes showed higher apparent kurtosis coef-
ficients compared with N0 tumors (119).

760  May-June 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 20.  Flowchart shows the process of radiomics and radiogenomics and the use of them in decision making. Radiomics and
radiogenomics extraction begins with the acquisition of high-quality images. Technology facilitates the high-throughput extraction
of quantitative features that results in the conversion of images into mineable data and the subsequent analysis of these data with
different types of clinical data (radiomics) or correlation with gene expression (radiogenomics) to develop diagnostic, predictive, or
prognostic models for decision-making support.

The stretched exponential model also provides

Unfortunately, all of these imaging techniques

an approximation of tissue heterogeneity. The
stretching parameter is linked to intravoxel hetero-
geneity of the diffusion process. The stretching pa-
rameter ranges from 0 to 1. A value near 1 indicates
high homogeneity in apparent diffusion, similar to a
monoexponential attenuation curve.

The stretched exponential model and the
stretching parameter are useful for assessment of
pathologic complete response after chemotherapy
and radiation therapy. The stretching parameter
might be more useful because it demonstrates
better diagnostic performance than do intravoxel in-
coherent motion−derived parameters and has better
reliability than do ADCs for evaluating pathologic
complete response (120).

The stretched exponential model also seems to
allow assessment of response to therapy. Changes
of the stretched exponential parameter are highly
significant at day 7 and day 28 after anti–vascular
endothelial growth factor therapy, improving evalu-
ation of ADC and intravoxel incoherent motion.
However, it was not easy to find a physiologic ex-
planation of these changes in the stretching parame-
ter, and no significant correlations between changes
in this parameter and the expected changes to DCE
imaging parameters secondary to antiangiogenic
therapy were found.

used for the evaluation of tumor heterogeneity
have two main limitations. First, biologic cor-
relates of these imaging techniques have not
been established definitively. And second, image
acquisition parameters and the applied analysis
protocol may affect the measurement of param-
eters and may change their biologic correlation.

radiomics and radiogenomics in CrC
The traditional practice of radiology involves evalu-
ation of medical images only as pictures for subjec-
tive visual interpretation. This is a limited approach
in oncology, because tumors are phenotypically
and genotypically heterogeneous. Medical images
contain information that reflects underlying biol-
ogy, and image heterogeneity is now considered a
potential biomarker (6–8,121). Thus, in radiomics
and radiogenomics, advanced computational tech-
niques are used to extract and analyze innumerable
quantitative descriptors of tumor heterogeneity and
phenotype (eg, shape, intensity, texture) from ra-
diologic images and to correlate them with clinical
reports, laboratory test results, and gene-expression
patterns or proteomic data (Fig 20).

These “-omics” may have a clinical effect:
improving decision making for cancer treatment
and the diagnostic, prognostic, and predictive

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  761

accuracy of imaging (6–8). K-ras and epider-
mal growth factor receptor gene mutations and
microsatellite instability have been linked to
stratification of prognosis in patients with CRC.
To date, there are limited data on the value of
radiomics or radiogenomics in patients with
CRC, although preliminary results showing that
radiomics may be useful for CRC staging have
been published (122–124). Voxel-based hetero-
geneity analysis based on multiparametric MR
imaging (including DWI and DCE MR imaging)
also may improve the capability of imaging for
prediction of pathologic complete response or
good response in patients with RC after neoadju-
vant radiation therapy and chemotherapy (102).
Radiogenomic studies are performed to try to
show the relationship between quantitative image
features and gene expression patterns. K-ras gene
mutation status is one of the main biomarkers in
patients with CRC. It is an independent prognostic
factor for survival and a predictive marker of tumor
response to anti–epidermal growth factor receptor−
targeted antibodies.

The possible correlation of imaging features and
the mutation status of the K-ras oncogene has been
evaluated with different imaging techniques. Shin et
al (125) reported that the frequency of K-ras muta-
tions was higher in polypoid tumors and lesions
with a longer axial length or a larger ratio of the
axial to the longitudinal dimension. However, mul-
tiparametric imaging based on a combined assess-
ment of 18F FDG uptake (maximum standardized
uptake value), CT texture (mean value of the tumor
pixels with positive values, or mean positive pixels),
and perfusion (blood flow) may improve accuracy
for identification of CRCs with K-ras mutations in
comparison with any parameter alone.

In addition, Miles et al (126) also showed that in
patients with K-ras mutation, there were additional
imaging signatures of tumor expression of HIF-1 or
minichromosome maintenance protein 2 (MCM-
2, a marker of tumor proliferation), suggesting
the presence of two different imaging phenotypes.
Patients with high standardized uptake value and
a low mean positive pixels value tended to express
HIFs, while those with low standardized uptake
value, high mean positive pixels, MCM-2, and
high blood flow demonstrated increased MCM-2
expression. Texture features extracted from CT
images of CRC metastases to the liver also were as-
sociated significantly with genetic signatures (K-ras
mutation status), pathologic features (tumor grade),
and patient outcome (127).

Other imaging techniques showed limited ac-
curacy for prediction of genetic alterations in pa-
tients with CRC. Published data (110) have not
demonstrated that uptake of 18F FDG at PET/
CT may be a surrogate marker for prediction

of K-ras mutation status. Similar findings were
reported by Chen et al (128), who found low
accuracy for prediction of TP53 and K-ras gene
mutations in patients with CRC based on 18F
FDG uptake. Recently, Xu et al (129) reported
that RCs with different K-ras mutation statuses
demonstrated distinctive diffusion and perfusion
characteristics on the basis of diffusion MR imag-
ing techniques. Finally, no significant correlations
were found between semiquantitative DCE MR
imaging parameters and K-ras mutation or mic-
rosatellite instability, which is another important
biomarker for CRC (52).

Future Challenges for Imaging of CRC
To date, technology has boosted our capabilities
for evaluating the tumor phenotype with mul-
tiple imaging-derived parameters obtained from
different imaging techniques; however, several
challenges for future advanced imaging of CRC
should be considered.

First, the application of new imaging tech-
niques in clinical practice requires the estab-
lishment and standardization of the technical
features for acquisition of good-quality data
and the development of robust techniques for
analysis. The values of quantitative parameters
depends on many features (eg, imaging tech-
nique, machine vendor, examination protocol,
mathematical model of analysis); thus, the cutoff
values defined in one study cannot be trans-
lated easily to other centers. Most studies are
performed to measure the values of parameters
by defining any region of interest placed in the
tumor. This approach has the potential risk of
allowing tumor heterogeneity to be overlooked,
because this region of interest may not represent
the overall tumor phenotype. There is usually no
precise correlation between parameters obtained
in the tumor region of interest and in pathologic
specimens. Furthermore, the reproducibility of
imaging parameters should be ensured.

Second, our understanding of how genetic,
histologic, and physiologic tumor features cor-
relate to spatial and temporal changes in imag-
ing parameters must be developed further. The
biologic correlations of many of the parameters
derived from these advanced imaging techniques
have not been established yet in patients with
CRC. Third, the real value of a multiparametric
imaging approach to tumor phenotypes in which
data from different functional and/or molecu-
lar imaging techniques are combined must be
explored and established. The complexity of
tumor biology is likely not a property that can
be assessed on the basis of a single imaging tool;
it will be assessed better with information from
a combination of multiple modalities. Last, the

762  May-June 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

use of imaging as a clinical decision-making tool
and the development of “-omics” (radiomics
and radiogenomics) as biomarkers of patient
outcome must be established (6–8).

Conclusion

There is a change in the paradigm of imaging
from the traditional approach of treating medi-
cal images as pictures to a new one: correlating
imaging features with genetic, histologic, clinical,
and prognostic and/or predictive data. Imaging
of CRC must move from pure anatomic imaging
techniques to quantitative functional and molec-
ular imaging techniques, imaging-based analysis
of tumor heterogeneity, and the development of
radiomics and radiogenomics.

The generalizability of these techniques to
more widespread clinical practice is an impor-
tant issue. To date, their clinical value has been
tested in relatively small single-center studies;
multicenter studies should be developed. There
are many open questions to answer, but, in the
future, the “-omics” data extracted from CRC
images should be combined with other nonradio-
logic data to produce models that may improve
diagnostic accuracy and predictive power for
decision making.

Disclosures of Conflicts of Interest.—A.R.P. Activities related to
the present article: disclosed no relevant relationships. Activities
not related to the present article:  software from Siemens Health-
ineers, personal fees from Jannsen Pharmaceuticals. Other ac-
tivities:  disclosed  no  relevant  relationships.  A.L.A.  Activities
related to the present article: disclosed no relevant relationships.
Activities  not related to the present article:  consultant for Bracco
and  Philips,  publication  rights  of  several  books  for  Springer.
Other activities: disclosed no relevant relationships.

references
  1. Global Burden of Disease Cancer Collaboration, Fitzmau-
rice C, Dicker D, et al. The global burden of cancer 2013.
JAMA Oncol 2015;1(4):505–527.

  2. Jhaveri KS, Hosseini-Nik H. MRI of rectal cancer: an over-
view and update on recent advances. AJR Am J Roentgenol
2015;205(1):W42–W55.

  3. García-Figueiras R, Baleato-González S, Padhani AR, et al.
Advanced imaging of colorectal cancer: from anatomy to
molecular imaging. Insights Imaging 2016;7(3):285–309.

  4. Figueiras RG, Goh V, Padhani AR, Naveira AB, Caamaño
AG, Martin CV. The role of functional imaging in colorectal
cancer. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2010;195(1):54–66.

  5. Padhani AR, Miles KA. Multiparametric imaging of tumor
response to therapy. Radiology 2010;256(2):348–364.
  6. O’Connor JP, Rose CJ, Waterton JC, Carano RA, Parker
GJ, Jackson A. Imaging intratumor heterogeneity: role in
therapy  response,  resistance,  and  clinical  outcome.  Clin
Cancer Res 2015;21(2):249–257.

  7. Sala E, Mema E, Himoto Y, et al. Unravelling tumour hetero-
geneity using next-generation imaging: radiomics, radioge-
nomics, and habitat imaging. Clin Radiol 2017;72(1):3–10.
  8. Gillies  RJ,  Kinahan  PE,  Hricak  H.  Radiomics:  im-
ages  are  more  than  pictures,  they  are  data.  Radiology
2016;278(2):563–577.

  9. Mazurowski MA. Radiogenomics: what it is and why it is

important. J Am Coll Radiol 2015;12(8):862–866.

  10. Balyasnikova S, Brown G. Imaging advances in colorectal
cancer. Curr Colorectal Cancer Rep 2016;12(3):162–169.

  11. Ko EY, Ha HK, Kim AY, et al. CT differentiation of mu-
cinous and nonmucinous colorectal carcinoma. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 2007;188(3):785–791.

  12. Li ZH, You DY, Gao DP, et al. Role of CT scan in differ-
entiating the type of colorectal cancer. Onco Targets Ther
2017;10:2297–2303.

  13. Fulwadhva UP, Wortman JR, Sodickson AD. Use of dual-
energy CT and iodine maps in evaluation of bowel disease.
RadioGraphics 2016;36(2):393–406.

  14. Gong HX, Zhang KB, Wu LM, et al. Dual energy spectral
CT  imaging  for  colorectal  cancer  grading:  a  preliminary
study. PLoS One 2016;11(2):e0147756.

  15. Kato T, Uehara K, Ishigaki S, et al. Clinical significance
of  dual-energy  CT-derived  iodine  quantification  in  the
diagnosis of metastatic LN in colorectal cancer. Eur J Surg
Oncol 2015;41(11):1464–1470.

  16. Waage  JE,  Leh  S,  Røsler  C,  et  al.  Endorectal  ultraso-
nography, strain elastography and MRI differentiation of
rectal  adenomas  and  adenocarcinomas.  Colorectal  Dis
2015;17(2):124–131.

  17. Levine MS, Yee J. History, evolution, and current status
of radiologic imaging tests for colorectal cancer screening.
Radiology 2014;273(2 suppl):S160–S180.

  18. Thornton  E,  Morrin  MM,  Yee  J.  Current  status  of  MR
colonography. RadioGraphics 2010;30(1):201–218.
  19. Pham TT, Liney GP, Wong K, Barton MB. Functional MRI
for quantitative treatment response prediction in locally ad-
vanced rectal cancer. Br J Radiol 2017;90(1072):20151078.
  20. Martens  MH,  van  Heeswijk  MM,  van  den  Broek  JJ,  et
al.  Prospective,  multicenter  validation  study  of  magnetic
resonance volumetry for response assessment after preop-
erative chemoradiation in rectal cancer: can the results in
the literature be reproduced? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2015;93(5):1005–1014.

  21. Petrillo M, Fusco R, Catalano O, et al. MRI for assessing
response to neoadjuvant therapy in locally advanced rectal
cancer using DCE-MR and DW-MR data sets: a preliminary
report. Biomed Res Int 2015;2015:514740.

  22. Lim MC, Tan CH, Cai J, Zheng J, Kow AW. CT volumetry
of the liver: where does it stand in clinical practice? Clin
Radiol 2014;69(9):887–895.

  23. Robinson C, Halligan S, Iinuma G, et al. CT colonography:
computer-assisted detection of colorectal cancer. Br J Radiol
2011;84(1001):435–440.

  24. van  der  Paardt  MP,  Zagers  MB,  Beets-Tan  RG,  Stoker
J,  Bipat  S.  Patients  who  undergo  preoperative  chemora-
diotherapy for locally advanced rectal cancer restaged by
using  diagnostic  MR  imaging:  a  systematic  review  and
meta-analysis. Radiology 2013;269(1):101–112.

  25. Martens  MH,  Lambregts  DM,  Papanikolaou  N,  et  al.
Magnetization transfer imaging to assess tumour response
after  chemoradiotherapy  in  rectal  cancer.  Eur  Radiol
2016;26(2):390–397.

  26. Kim HJ, Lee SS, Byun JH, et al. Incremental value of liver
MR imaging in patients with potentially curable colorectal
hepatic metastasis detected at CT: a prospective comparison
of  diffusion-weighted  imaging,  gadoxetic  acid–enhanced
MR imaging, and a combination of both MR techniques.
Radiology 2015;274(3):712–722.

  27. Kukuk GM, Schaefer SG, Fimmers R, et al. Hepatobiliary
magnetic resonance imaging in patients with liver disease:
correlation  of  liver  enhancement  with  biochemical  liver
function tests. Eur Radiol 2014;24(10):2482–2490.
  28. Permutt Z, Le TA, Peterson MR, et al. Correlation between
liver  histology  and  novel  magnetic  resonance  imaging  in
adult patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: MRI
accurately quantifies hepatic steatosis in NAFLD. Aliment
Pharmacol Ther 2012;36(1):22–29.

  29. Taouli B, Beer AJ, Chenevert T, et al. Diffusion-weighted
imaging  outside  the  brain:  consensus  statement  from  an
ISMRM-sponsored  workshop.  J  Magn  Reson  Imaging
2016;44(3):521–540.

  30. Jia H, Ma X, Zhao Y, et al. Meta-analysis of diffusion-weighted
magnetic  resonance  imaging  in  identification  of  colorectal
cancer. Int J Clin Exp Med 2015;8(10):17333–17342.
  31. Curvo-Semedo L, Lambregts DMJ, Maas M, Beets GL,
Caseiro-Alves F, Beets-Tan RGH. Diffusion-weighted MRI

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  763

in rectal cancer: apparent diffusion coefficient as a potential
noninvasive marker of tumor aggressiveness. J Magn Reson
Imaging 2012;35(6):1365–1371.

  32. Tong T, Yao Z, Xu L, et al. Extramural depth of tumor
invasion at thin-section MR in rectal cancer: associating with
prognostic factors and ADC value. J Magn Reson Imaging
2014;40(3):738–744.

  33. Monguzzi  L,  Ippolito  D,  Bernasconi  DP,  Trattenero  C,
Galimberti  S,  Sironi  S.  Locally  advanced  rectal  cancer:
value of ADC mapping in prediction of tumor response to
radiochemotherapy. Eur J Radiol 2013;82(2):234–240.
  34. Lambregts DM, Maas M, Cappendijk VC, et al. Whole-body
diffusion-weighted  magnetic  resonance  imaging:  current
evidence in oncology and potential role in colorectal cancer
staging. Eur J Cancer 2011;47(14):2107–2116.

  35. Gong  J,  Cao  W,  Zhang  Z,  et  al.  Diagnostic  efficacy  of
whole-body diffusion-weighted imaging in the detection of
tumour recurrence and metastasis by comparison with 18F-
2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography
or computed tomography in patients with gastrointestinal
cancer. Gastroenterol Rep (Oxf) 2015;3(2):128–135.
  36. Sun YS, Zhang XP, Tang L, et al. Locally advanced rectal
carcinoma  treated  with  preoperative  chemotherapy  and
radiation therapy: preliminary analysis of diffusion-weighted
MR imaging for early detection of tumor histopathologic
downstaging. Radiology 2010;254(1):170–178.

  37. Ryan  JE,  Warrier  SK,  Lynch  AC,  Heriot  AG.  Assessing
pathological complete response to neoadjuvant chemora-
diotherapy in locally advanced rectal cancer: a systematic
review. Colorectal Dis 2015;17(10):849–861.

  38. Joye I, Deroose CM, Vandecaveye V, Haustermans K. The
role of diffusion-weighted MRI and (18)F-FDG PET/CT
in  the  prediction  of  pathologic  complete  response  after
radiochemotherapy for rectal cancer: a systematic review.
Radiother Oncol 2014;113(2):158–165.

  39. Grosu S, Schäfer AO, Baumann T, Manegold P, Langer M,
Gerstmair A. Differentiating locally recurrent rectal cancer
from  scar  tissue:  value  of  diffusion-weighted  MRI.  Eur  J
Radiol 2016;85(7):1265–1270.

  40. Koh  DM,  Collins  DJ,  Orton  MR.  Intravoxel  incoherent
motion in body diffusion-weighted MRI: reality and chal-
lenges. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2011;196(6):1351–1361.
  41. Lee HJ, Rha SY, Chung YE, et al. Tumor perfusion-related
parameter of diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imag-
ing: correlation with histological microvessel density. Magn
Reson Med 2014;71(4):1554–1558.

  42. Yu  XP,  Wen  L,  Hou  J,  et  al.  Discrimination  between
metastatic and nonmetastatic mesorectal lymph nodes in
rectal cancer using intravoxel incoherent motion diffusion-
weighted  magnetic  resonance  imaging.  Acad  Radiol
2016;23(4):479–485.

  43. Kim  JH,  Joo  I,  Kim  TY,  et  al.  Diffusion-related  MRI
parameters for assessing early treatment response of liver
metastases to cytotoxic therapy in colorectal cancer. AJR
Am J Roentgenol 2016;207(3):W26–W32.

  44. Granata V, Fusco R, Catalano O, et al. Early assessment
of colorectal cancer patients with liver metastases treated
with antiangiogenic drugs: the role of intravoxel incoher-
ent  motion  in  diffusion-weighted  imaging.  PLoS  One
2015;10(11):e0142876.

  45. Rosenkrantz AB, Padhani AR, Chenevert TL, et al. Body
diffusion kurtosis imaging: basic principles, applications, and
considerations for clinical practice. J Magn Reson Imaging
2015;42(5):1190–1202.

  46. Yu  J,  Huang  DY,  Li  Y,  Dai  X,  Shi  HB.  Correlation  of
standard diffusion-weighted imaging and diffusion kurtosis
imaging with distant metastases of rectal carcinoma. J Magn
Reson Imaging 2016;44(1):221–229.

  47. Yu J, Xu Q, Song JC, et al. The value of diffusion kurtosis
magnetic resonance imaging for assessing treatment response
of neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy in locally advanced rectal
cancer. Eur Radiol 2017;27(5):1848–1857.

  48. Zhang G, Wang S, Wen D, et al. Comparison of non-Gaussian
and Gaussian diffusion models of diffusion weighted imaging
of rectal cancer at 3.0 T MRI. Sci Rep 2016;6(1):38782.

  49. Goh V, Glynne-Jones R. Perfusion CT imaging of colorectal

cancer. Br J Radiol 2014;87(1034):20130811.

  50. Yeo DM, Oh SN, Jung CK, et al. Correlation of dynamic
contrast-enhanced MRI perfusion parameters with angiogen-
esis and biologic aggressiveness of rectal cancer: preliminary
results. J Magn Reson Imaging 2015;41(2):474–480.
  51. Lollert A, Junginger T, Schimanski CC, et al. Rectal cancer:
dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI correlates with lymph node
status and epidermal growth factor receptor expression. J
Magn Reson Imaging 2014;39(6):1436–1442.

  52. Hong HS, Kim SH, Park HJ, et al. Correlations of dynamic
contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging with mor-
phologic, angiogenic, and molecular prognostic factors in
rectal cancer. Yonsei Med J 2013;54(1):123–130.

  53. Alberda WJ, Dassen HP, Dwarkasing RS, et al. Prediction
of tumor stage and lymph node involvement with dynamic
contrast-enhanced MRI after chemoradiotherapy for locally
advanced rectal cancer. Int J Colorectal Dis 2013;28(4):573–
580.

  54. Intven M, Monninkhof EM, Reerink O, Philippens ME.
Combined T2w volumetry, DW-MRI and DCE-MRI for
response assessment after neo-adjuvant chemoradiation in lo-
cally advanced rectal cancer. Acta Oncol 2015;54(10):1729–
1736.

  55. Gollub MJ, Tong T, Weiser M, Zheng J, Gonen M, Zakian
KL. Limited accuracy of DCE-MRI in identification of patho-
logical complete responders after chemoradiotherapy treat-
ment for rectal cancer. Eur Radiol 2017;27(4):1605–1612.
  56. Hötker AM, Tarlinton L, Mazaheri Y, et al. Multiparametric
MRI in the assessment of response of rectal cancer to neoad-
juvant chemoradiotherapy: a comparison of morphological,
volumetric  and  functional  MRI  parameters.  Eur  Radiol
2016;26(12):4303–4312.

  57. Goh V, Halligan S, Daley F, Wellsted DM, Guenther T,
Bartram CI. Colorectal tumor vascularity: quantitative assess-
ment with multidetector CT—do tumor perfusion measure-
ments reflect angiogenesis? Radiology 2008;249(2):510–517.
  58. Dighe S, Blake H, Jeyadevan N, et al. Perfusion CT vascular
parameters do not correlate with immunohistochemically
derived  microvessel  density  count  in  colorectal  tumors.
Radiology 2013;268(2):400–410.

  59. Xu Y, Sun H, Song A, Yang Q, Lu X, Wang W. Predictive
significance of tumor grade using 256-slice CT whole-tumor
perfusion imaging in colorectal adenocarcinoma. Acad Radiol
2015;22(12):1529–1535.

  60. Sun  H,  Xu  Y,  Yang  Q,  Wang  W.  Assessment  of  tumor
grade and angiogenesis in colorectal cancer: whole-volume
perfusion CT. Acad Radiol 2014;21(6):750–757.

  61. Hayano  K,  Fujishiro  T,  Sahani  DV,  et  al.  Computed
tomography  perfusion  imaging  as  a  potential  imaging
biomarker  of  colorectal  cancer.  World  J  Gastroenterol
2014;20(46):17345–17351.

  62. Kino A, Shaffer J, Maturen KE, et al. Perfusion CT measure-
ments predict tumor response in rectal carcinoma. Abdom
Radiol (NY) 2017;42(4):1132–1140.

  63. Tixier F, Groves AM, Goh V, et al. Correlation of intra-
tumor 18F-FDG uptake heterogeneity indices with perfusion
CT  derived  parameters  in  colorectal  cancer.  PLoS  One
2014;9(6):e99567.

  64. Goh V, Engledow A, Rodriguez-Justo M, et al. The flow-
metabolic phenotype of primary colorectal cancer: assessment
by integrated 18F-FDG PET/perfusion CT with histopatho-
logic correlation. J Nucl Med 2012;53(5):687–692.
  65. Zhuang  H,  Yang  ZG,  Chen  HJ,  Peng  YL,  Li  L.  Time-
intensity curve parameters in colorectal tumours measured
using double contrast-enhanced ultrasound: correlations with
tumour angiogenesis. Colorectal Dis 2012;14(2):181–187.
  66. Meijerink MR, van Waesberghe JH, van Schaik C, et al.
Perfusion CT and US of colorectal cancer liver metastases:
a  correlative  study  of  two  dynamic  imaging  modalities.
Ultrasound Med Biol 2010;36(10):1626–1636.

  67. O’Connor JP, Naish JH, Parker GJ, et al. Preliminary study of
oxygen-enhanced longitudinal relaxation in MRI: a potential
novel biomarker of oxygenation changes in solid tumors. Int
J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2009;75(4):1209–1215.

  68. van Heeswijk MM, Lambregts DM, Palm WM, et al. DWI for
assessment of rectal cancer nodes after chemoradiotherapy:
is the absence of nodes at DWI proof of a negative nodal
status? AJR Am J Roentgenol 2017;208(3):W79–W84.

764  May-June 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

  69. Cerny M, Dunet V, Prior JO, et al. Initial staging of locally
advanced rectal cancer and regional lymph nodes: comparison
of diffusion-weighted MRI with 18F-FDG-PET/CT. Clin
Nucl Med 2016;41(4):289–295.

  70. Harisinghani MG, Saini S, Weissleder R, et al. MR lymphan-
giography using ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide in
patients with primary abdominal and pelvic malignancies:
radiographic-pathologic correlation. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1999;172(5):1347–1351.

  71. Fortuin AS, Brüggemann R, van der Linden J, et al. Ultra-
small superparamagnetic iron oxides for metastatic lymph
node detection: back on the block. Wiley Interdiscip Rev
Nanomed Nanobiotechnol 2018;10(1).

  72. Vag T, Slotta-Huspenina J, Rosenberg R, et al. Comput-
erized analysis of enhancement kinetics for preoperative
lymph node staging in rectal cancer using dynamic contrast-
enhanced  magnetic  resonance  imaging.  Clin  Imaging
2014;38(6):845–849.

  73. Yu XP, Wen L, Hou J, Wang H, Lu Q. Discrimination of
metastatic from non-metastatic mesorectal lymph nodes in
rectal cancer using quantitative dynamic contrast-enhanced
magnetic resonance imaging. J Huazhong Univ Sci Tech-
nolog Med Sci 2016;36(4):594–600.

  74. Lambregts  DM,  Heijnen  LA,  Maas  M,  et  al.  Gado-
fosveset-enhanced  MRI  for  the  assessment  of  rectal
cancer lymph nodes: predictive criteria. Abdom Imaging
2013;38(4):720–727.

  75. Laurens ST, Oyen WJ. Impact of fluorodeoxyglucose PET/
computed tomography on the management of patients with
colorectal cancer. PET Clin 2015;10(3):345–360.

  76. Brush  J,  Boyd  K,  Chappell  F,  et  al.  The  value  of  FDG
positron  emission  tomography/computerised  tomography
(PET/CT) in pre-operative staging of colorectal cancer: a
systematic review and economic evaluation. Health Technol
Assess 2011;15(35):1–192, iii–iv.

  77. De  Vos  N,  Goethals  I,  Ceelen  W.  Clinical  value  of  (18)
F-FDG-PET-CT in the preoperative staging of peritoneal
carcinomatosis  from  colorectal  origin.  Acta  Chir  Belg
2014;114(6):370–375.

  78. Maffione AM, Marzola MC, Capirci C, Colletti PM, Rubello
D. Value of (18)F-FDG PET for predicting response to neo-
adjuvant therapy in rectal cancer: systematic review and meta-
analysis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2015;204(6):1261–1268.

  79. de  Geus-Oei  LF,  Ruers  TJ,  Punt  CJ,  et  al.  FDG-PET
in  colorectal  cancer.  Cancer  Imaging  2006;6(Spec  No
A):S71–S81.

  80. Culverwell AD, Chowdhury FU, Scarsbrook AF. Optimizing
the role of FDG PET-CT for potentially operable metastatic
colorectal cancer. Abdom Imaging 2012;37(6):1021–1031.
  81. Marcus C, Wray R, Taghipour M, et al. Journal club: value
of  quantitative  FDG  PET/CT  volumetric  biomarkers  in
recurrent  colorectal  cancer  patient  survival.  AJR  Am  J
Roentgenol 2016;207(2):257–265.

  82. Kang B, Lee JM, Song YS, et al. Added value of integrated
whole-body PET/MRI for evaluation of colorectal cancer:
comparison  with  contrast-enhanced  MDCT.  AJR  Am  J
Roentgenol 2016;206(1):W10–W20.

  83. Lee  DH,  Lee  JM.  Whole-body  PET/MRI  for  colorectal
cancer staging: is it the way forward? J Magn Reson Imaging
2017;45(1):21–35.

  84. Brendle C, Schwenzer NF, Rempp H, et al. Assessment of
metastatic colorectal cancer with hybrid imaging: compari-
son of reading performance using different combinations
of anatomical and functional imaging techniques in PET/
MRI and PET/CT in a short case series. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging 2016;43(1):123–132.

  85. Nakajo M, Nakajo M, Kajiya Y, et al. Diagnostic performance
of  18F-fluorothymidine  PET/CT  for  primary  colorectal
cancer  and  its  lymph  node  metastasis:  comparison  with
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose  PET/CT.  Eur  J  Nucl  Med  Mol
Imaging 2013;40(8):1223–1232.

  86. Muijs  CT,  Beukema  JC,  Widder  J,  et  al.  18F-FLT-
PET  for  detection  of  rectal  cancer.  Radiother  Oncol
2011;98(3):357–359.

  87. Roels S, Slagmolen P, Nuyts J, et al. Biological image-guided
radiotherapy in rectal cancer: is there a role for FMISO or
FLT, next to FDG? Acta Oncol 2008;47(7):1237–1248.

  88. Wieder HA, Geinitz H, Rosenberg R, et al. PET imaging
with  [18F]3’-deoxy-3’-fluorothymidine  for  prediction  of
response to neoadjuvant treatment in patients with rectal
cancer. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2007;34(6):878–883.
  89. Rendl G, Rettenbacher L, Holzmannhofer J, et al. Assess-
ment of response to neoadjuvant radiochemotherapy with
F-18 FLT and F-18 FDG PET/CT in patients with rectal
cancer. Ann Nucl Med 2015;29(3):284–294.

  90. Wang H, Zhang J, Tian J, et al. Using dual-tracer PET to
predict the biologic behavior of human colorectal cancer. J
Nucl Med 2009;50(11):1857–1864.

  91. Dietz  DW,  Dehdashti  F,  Grigsby  PW,  et  al.  Tumor
hypoxia detected by positron emission tomography with
60Cu-ATSM  as  a  predictor  of  response  and  survival  in
patients  undergoing  neoadjuvant  chemoradiotherapy
for  rectal  carcinoma:  a  pilot  study.  Dis  Colon  Rectum
2008;51(11):1641–1648.

  92. Havelund BM, Holdgaard PC, Rafaelsen SR, et al. Tumour
hypoxia imaging with 18F-fluoroazomycinarabinofuranoside
PET/CT  in  patients  with  locally  advanced  rectal  cancer.
Nucl Med Commun 2013;34(2):155–161.

  93. Kim MJ, Lee SJ, Lee JH, et al. Detection of rectal cancer
and response to concurrent chemoradiotherapy by proton
magnetic  resonance  spectroscopy.  Magn  Reson  Imaging
2012;30(6):848–853.

  94. Dzik-Jurasz AS, Murphy PS, George M, et al. Human rectal
adenocarcinoma: demonstration of 1H-MR spectra in vivo
at 1.5 T. Magn Reson Med 2002;47(4):809–811.

  95. van  Laarhoven  HW,  de  Geus-Oei  LF,  Wiering  B,  et  al.
Gadopentetate  dimeglumine  and  FDG  uptake  in  liver
metastases of colorectal carcinoma as determined with MR
imaging and PET. Radiology 2005;237(1):181–188.
  96. Janssen MHM, Aerts HJWL, Buijsen J, Lambin P, Lammer-
ing G, Öllers MC. Repeated positron emission tomography-
computed tomography and perfusion-computed tomography
imaging in rectal cancer: fluorodeoxyglucose uptake corre-
sponds with tumor perfusion. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2012;82(2):849–855.

  97. Gu J, Khong PL, Wang S, et al. Dynamic contrast-enhanced
MRI of primary rectal cancer: quantitative correlation with
positron  emission  tomography/computed  tomography.  J
Magn Reson Imaging 2011;33(2):340–347.

  98. Fischer MA, Vrugt B, Alkadhi H, Hahnloser D, Hany TF,
Veit-Haibach P. Integrated 18F-FDG PET/perfusion CT
for  the  monitoring  of  neoadjuvant  chemoradiotherapy  in
rectal  carcinoma:  correlation  with  histopathology.  Eur  J
Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2014;41(8):1563–1573.

  99. Er  HÇ,  Erden  A,  Küçük  NÖ,  Geçim  E.  Correlation  of
minimum  apparent  diffusion  coefficient  with  maximum
standardized  uptake  on  fluorodeoxyglucose  PET-CT  in
patients with rectal adenocarcinoma. Diagn Interv Radiol
2014;20(2):105–109.

100. Catalano OA, Coutinho AM, Sahani DV, et al. Colorectal
cancer  staging:  comparison  of  whole-body  PET/CT  and
PET/MR. Abdom Radiol (NY) 2017;42(4):1141–1151.

101. Lee SJ, Seo HJ, Kang KW, et al. Clinical performance of
whole-body  18F-FDG  PET/Dixon-VIBE,  T1-weighted,
and T2-weighted MRI protocol in colorectal cancer. Clin
Nucl Med 2015;40(8):e392–e398.

102. Nie K, Shi L, Chen Q, et al. Rectal cancer: assessment
of  neoadjuvant  chemoradiation  outcome  based  on
radiomics  of  multiparametric  MRI.  Clin  Cancer  Res
2016;22(21):5256–5264.

103. De Cecco CN, Ciolina M, Caruso D, et al. Performance
of  diffusion-weighted  imaging,  perfusion  imaging,  and
texture analysis in predicting tumoral response to neoad-
juvant chemoradiotherapy in rectal cancer patients studied
with  3T  MR:  initial  experience.  Abdom  Radiol  (NY)
2016;41(9):1728–1735.

104. Attenberger  UI,  Ong  MM,  Rathmann  N,  et  al.  mMRI
at 3.0 T as an evaluation tool of therapeutic response to
neoadjuvant  CRT  in  patients  with  advanced-stage  rectal
cancer. Anticancer Res 2017;37(1):215–222.

105. van Heeswijk MM, Lambregts DMJ, Maas M, et al. Mea-
suring the apparent diffusion coefficient in primary rectal
tumors: is there a benefit in performing histogram analyses?
Abdom Radiol (NY) 2017;42(6):1627–1636.

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 3

García-Figueiras et al  765

106. Choi MH, Oh SN, Rha SE, et al. Diffusion-weighted imaging:
apparent diffusion coefficient histogram analysis for detect-
ing  pathologic  complete  response  to  chemoradiotherapy
in locally advanced rectal cancer. J Magn Reson Imaging
2016;44(1):212–220.

107. Orlhac F, Soussan M, Maisonobe JA, Garcia CA, Vander-
linden  B,  Buvat  I.  Tumor  texture  analysis  in  18F-FDG
PET: relationships between texture parameters, histogram
indices, standardized uptake values, metabolic volumes, and
total lesion glycolysis. J Nucl Med 2014;55(3):414–422.

108. Lovinfosse P, Koopmansch B, Lambert F, et al. (18)F-FDG
PET/CT imaging in rectal cancer: relationship with the RAS
mutational status. Br J Radiol 2016;89(1063):20160212.

109. Wagner F, Hakami YA, Warnock G, Fischer G, Huellner
MW, Veit-Haibach P. Comparison of contrast-enhanced
CT and [18F]FDG PET/CT analysis using kurtosis and
skewness in patients with primary colorectal cancer. Mol
Imaging Biol 2017;19(5):795–803.

110. Song B, Zhang G, Lu H, et al. Volumetric texture features
from  higher-order  images  for  diagnosis  of  colon  lesions
via  CT  colonography.  Int  J  Comput  Assist  Radiol  Surg
2014;9(6):1021–1031.

111. Rao  SX,  Lambregts  DM,  Schnerr  RS,  et  al.  Whole-liver
CT texture analysis in colorectal cancer: does the presence
of liver metastases affect the texture of the remaining liver?
United European Gastroenterol J 2014;2(6):530–538.
112. Liu L, Liu Y, Xu L, et al. Application of texture analysis
based on apparent diffusion coefficient maps in discriminat-
ing different stages of rectal cancer. J Magn Reson Imaging
2017;45(6):1798–1808.

113. Cui  C,  Cai  H,  Liu  L,  Li  L,  Tian  H,  Li  L.  Quantitative
analysis  and  prediction  of  regional  lymph  node  status  in
rectal cancer based on computed tomography imaging. Eur
Radiol 2011;21(11):2318–2325.

114. Ng  F,  Ganeshan  B,  Kozarski  R,  Miles  KA,  Goh  V.  As-
sessment  of  primary  colorectal  cancer  heterogeneity  by
using  whole-tumor  texture  analysis:  contrast-enhanced
CT  texture  as  a  biomarker  of  5-year  survival.  Radiology
2013;266(1):177–184.

115. Jalil  O,  Afaq  A,  Ganeshan  B,  et  al.  Magnetic  resonance
based texture parameters as potential imaging biomarkers
for predicting long-term survival in locally advanced rec-
tal  cancer  treated  by  chemoradiotherapy.  Colorectal  Dis
2017;19(4):349–362.

116. De Cecco CN, Ganeshan B, Ciolina M, et al. Texture analysis
as imaging biomarker of tumoral response to neoadjuvant
chemoradiotherapy in rectal cancer patients studied with 3-T
magnetic resonance. Invest Radiol 2015;50(4):239–245.

117. Goh  V,  Sanghera  B,  Wellsted  DM,  Sundin  J,  Halligan
S. Assessment of the spatial pattern of colorectal tumour
perfusion estimated at perfusion CT using two-dimensional
fractal analysis. Eur Radiol 2009;19(6):1358–1365.
118. Esgiar AN, Naguib RN, Sharif BS, Bennett MK, Murray A.
Fractal analysis in the detection of colonic cancer images.
IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed 2002;6(1):54–58.
119. Zhu  L,  Pan  Z,  Ma  Q,  et  al.  Diffusion  kurtosis  imaging
study of rectal adenocarcinoma associated with histopatho-
logic  prognostic  factors:  preliminary  findings.  Radiology
2017;284(1):66–76.

120. Zhu  HB,  Zhang  XY,  Zhou  XH,  et  al.  Assessment  of
pathological complete response to preoperative chemora-
diotherapy by means of multiple mathematical models of
diffusion-weighted MRI in locally advanced rectal cancer:
a prospective single-center study. J Magn Reson Imaging
2017;46(1):175–183.

121. Larue RT, Defraene G, De Ruysscher D, Lambin P, van
Elmpt  W.  Quantitative  radiomics  studies  for  tissue  char-
acterization:  a  review  of  technology  and  methodological
procedures. Br J Radiol 2017;90(1070):20160665.

122. Dinapoli N, Casà C, Barbaro B, et al. Radiomics for rectal
cancer. Transl Cancer Res TCR 2016;5(4):424–436.
123. Liang C, Huang Y, He L, et al. The development and valida-
tion of a CT-based radiomics signature for the preoperative
discrimination of stage I-II and stage III-IV colorectal cancer.
Oncotarget 2016;7(21):31401–31412.

124. Huang YQ, Liang CH, He L, et al. Development and valida-
tion of a radiomics nomogram for preoperative prediction
of lymph node metastasis in colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol
2016;34(18):2157–2164.

125. Shin YR, Kim KA, Im S, Hwang SS, Kim K. Prediction
of KRAS mutation in rectal cancer using MRI. Anticancer
Res 2016;36(9):4799–4804.

126. Miles KA, Ganeshan B, Rodriguez-Justo M, et al. Multi-
functional  imaging  signature  for  V-KI-RAS2  Kirsten  rat
sarcoma  viral  oncogene  homolog  (KRAS)  mutations  in
colorectal cancer. J Nucl Med 2014;55(3):386–391.
127. Lubner MG, Stabo N, Lubner SJ, et al. CT textural analy-
sis  of  hepatic  metastatic  colorectal  cancer:  pre-treatment
tumor heterogeneity correlates with pathology and clinical
outcomes. Abdom Imaging 2015;40(7):2331–2337.
128. Chen SW, Lin CY, Ho CM, et al. Genetic alterations in
colorectal cancer have different patterns on 18F-FDG PET/
CT. Clin Nucl Med 2015;40(8):621–626.

129. Xu Y, Xu Q, Sun H, et al. Could IVIM and ADC help in
predicting the KRAS status in patients with rectal cancer?
Eur Radiol 2018 Feb 15. doi: 10.1007/s00330-018-5329-y.
[Epub ahead of print]

This journal-based SA-CME activity has been approved for AMA PRA Category 1 CreditTM. See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

