Note:  This copy is for your personal non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready
copies for distribution to your colleagues or clients, contact us at www.rsna.org/rsnarights.

GASTROINTESTINAL IMAGING

1053

Chronic Fibrosing Conditions
in Abdominal Imaging1

SA-CME

See www.rsna
.org/education
/search/RG

LEARNING
OBJECTIVES
FOR TEST 5

After completing this
journal-based SA-
CME activity, partic-
ipants will be able to:

 ■ Discuss the
nomenclature of
chronic fibrosing
conditions of the
abdomen.

 ■ Describe the
pathophysiology and
associations of these
conditions.

 ■ List the imaging
findings and differ-
ential diagnoses of
these conditions.

INVITED
COMMENTARY

See discussion on
this article by Butler
(pp 1080–1082).

Verghese George, MBBS, FRCR • Varaha Sairam Tammisetti, MD
Venkateswar Rao Surabhi, MD • Alampady K. Shanbhogue, MD

Chronic fibrosing conditions of the abdomen are relatively poorly under-
stood and involve varied and often multiple organ systems. At histopatho-
logic analysis, they share the unifying features of proliferative fibrosis and
chronic inflammation. Different conditions in this group are often found
in association with each other and with other fibrosing conditions out-
side the abdomen. Some of the confusion about these conditions stems
from their complex nomenclature, which includes a gamut of alternate
terms and eponyms. Many of them can be categorized within two large
subgroups: the fibromatoses and immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)–related
disorders. While many of these entities are of uncertain etiology, some,
especially the IgG4-associated conditions, appear to have an immune-
mediated pathogenesis. Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, sclerosing perito-
nitis, and retroperitoneal fibrosis have iatrogenic associations, while some
of the fibromatoses are genetically inherited. Imaging differentiation of
these conditions is difficult due to considerable overlap in their radiologic
findings. However, certain conditions such as penile fibromatosis and
sclerosing peritonitis may have unique imaging features that can help the
radiologist make the diagnosis. Others such as deep fibromatoses and in-
flammatory pseudotumor demonstrate fibroproliferative mass formation
and cannot be differentiated from neoplastic conditions at imaging. Thus,
histopathologic correlation is often required to confirm their diagnosis.

Introduction
The conditions described in this article manifest as infiltrating, often locally invasive
fibroproliferative processes involving diverse sites in the abdomen and pelvis. Pro-
gressive compressive encasement of abdominopelvic viscera by the infiltrating fibro-
sis typically leads to mass effect and potentially fatal organ dysfunction. While some
of the conditions are discrete, unrelated entities, many of them occur concurrently
and in association with other fibrosing conditions involving the rest of the body.

Abbreviations:  AIP = autoimmune pancreatitis, ANCA = anti–neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, CAPD = continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialy-
sis, CBD = common bile duct, FAP = familial adenomatous polyposis, FDG = fluorine 18 fluorodeoxyglucose, IgG4 = immunoglobulin G4, IMT =
inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, IPT = inflammatory pseudotumor, ISD = IgG4-related sclerosing disease, MIP = maximum intensity projec-
tion, MOE = massive ovarian edema, NSF = nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, PSC = primary sclerosing cholangitis, RPF = retroperitoneal fibrosis,
SEP = sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis, SSC = secondary sclerosing cholangitis

RadioGraphics 2013; 33:1053–1080 • Published online 10.1148/rg.334125081 • Content Codes:

1From the Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Imaging, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, MSB 2.130B, 6431 Fannin
St, Houston, TX 77030 (V.G., V.S.T., V.R.S.); and Department of Radiology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio,
Tex (A.K.S.). Presented as an education exhibit at the 2011 RSNA Annual Meeting. Received April 18, 2012; revision requested July 9; final revision
received January 4, 2013; accepted January 11. For this journal-based SA-CME activity, the authors, editor, and reviewers have no financial relation-
ships to disclose. Address correspondence to V.G. (e-mail: verghese.george@uth.tmc.edu).

©RSNA, 2013 • radiographics.rsna.org

1054

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

Many of the entities described in this article
can be categorized under one of two large sub-
groups: the fibromatoses and immunoglobulin
G4 (IgG4)–related disorders. The fibromatoses
subgroup comprises a wide range of conditions
that are characterized by infiltrative fibrous tis-
sue proliferation and a tendency to recur locally.
IgG4-related sclerosing disease (ISD), also known
as hyper-IgG4 disease, is a recently described
constellation of conditions that share the common
histopathologic findings of lymphoplasmacytic
inflammation with IgG4-positive cells and marked
fibrosis. Many discrete conditions described in this
article such as sclerosing mesenteritis, retroperito-
neal fibrosis (RPF), sclerosing cholangitis, inflam-
matory pseudotumor (IPT), and autoimmune
pancreatitis (AIP) are now thought to fall under
the IgG4-related umbrella. For the sake of clarity,
however, these conditions have been described in-
dividually, with a brief overview of ISD toward the
end of the article.

Nomenclature relating to these conditions is
dealt with in some detail, since it can be a source
of confusion, resulting predominantly from the
multiple alternate terms employed in the litera-
ture to describe them. The condition previously
known as desmoid is a typical case in point. Now
identified as aggressive fibromatosis, desmoid
belongs to the aforementioned subgroup called
the fibromatoses. The multiple subtypes of fibro-
matoses can involve different parts of the body;
to further add to the confusion, many of these
subtypes also have eponyms, such as Peyronie
disease for penile fibromatosis and Ledderhose
disease for plantar fibromatosis. Similar-sounding
names for unrelated conditions, such as scleros-
ing mesenteritis and sclerosing peritonitis, can
also contribute to the lack of clarity in nomencla-
ture. On a similar note, ovarian fibromatosis and
neurofibromatosis may be mistakenly identified
as entities within the fibromatoses subgroup.

The pathophysiology of many of these pro-
cesses is complex and often poorly understood. A
significant number of these entities are idiopathic.
While nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) is the
most notable iatrogenic condition in the group,
others such as sclerosing peritonitis and RPF
also have iatrogenic associations. Histopathologic
findings of ISD suggest an immune-mediated
mechanism for the components of that subgroup.
The fibromatoses are unique among chronic
fibrosing conditions in that a subset of them is
genetically inherited.

Imaging findings of these conditions follow gen-
eral radiologic characteristics of infiltrative fibrous
tissue and hence often show considerable overlap;

their differentiation may thus be difficult without
the aid of histopathologic correlation. However, a
few conditions may have unique radiologic find-
ings that can enable a diagnosis based on imaging
findings alone. These include sclerosing encapsulat-
ing peritonitis (SEP), penile fibromatosis, ovarian
fibromatosis, and AIP. Some, such as deep fibroma-
tosis and IPT, demonstrate fibroproliferative mass
formation (as opposed to the more commonly seen
infiltrative fibrosis) and cannot be differentiated
from neoplasia without biopsy correlation.

After an overview of imaging features of fibrous

tissue, chronic fibrosing conditions of the abdo-
men are reviewed in the following order: sclerosing
mesenteritis; sclerosing peritonitis; primary scle-
rosing cholangitis (PSC); RPF; the fibromatoses
(abdominal fibromatoses, penile fibromatosis);
ovarian fibromatosis; IPT; NSF; AIP; and ISD.

Imaging Features of Fibrous Tissue
Regardless of location, fibrosis displays certain
general radiologic characteristics. Fibrous tis-
sue is hypoechoic at ultrasonography (US), often
showing acoustic shadowing, with relative hy-
povascularity at Doppler imaging. At computed
tomography (CT), it appears isoattenuating to
muscle, with corresponding isointensity noted at
T1-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) imag-
ing. It shows markedly low signal intensity at T2-
weighted imaging. It typically does not show sig-
nificant restriction at diffusion-weighted imaging
due to reduced cellularity. Contrast-enhanced CT
and MR imaging show relative paucity of enhance-
ment in the parenchymal phase, with character-
istic delayed phase enhancement. Variations from
these appearances may be seen, depending on the
degree of cellularity of the lesions and associated
inflammatory changes.

Sclerosing Mesenteritis
The term sclerosing mesenteritis refers to a spectrum
(1) of uncommon, idiopathic, chronic inflamma-
tory conditions affecting the mesentery (2). The
condition predominantly affects men between the
5th and 7th decades of life and can lead to a vari-
ety of nonspecific symptoms, including abdominal
pain, nausea and vomiting, weight loss, and fever.

Nomenclature
Owing to a multitude of alternate names for this
condition, the nomenclature of sclerosing mesen-
teritis has been mired in confusion. The following
terms have been used to describe it in the past:
systemic nodular panniculitis, liposclerosis mesenteri-
tis, mesenteric Weber-Christian disease, mesenteric
lipogranuloma, and xanthogranulomatous mesen-
teritis (2). In addition, the subtypes of the condi-
tion—namely, mesenteric panniculitis, mesenteric

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1055

Figure 1.  Mesenteric panniculitis. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image shows the misty mesentery sign
as haziness of the affected mesentery (arrow). Note the multiple mesenteric nodes. (b) Axial contrast-
enhanced CT image shows the fat-ring sign as preservation of fatty attenuation around vessels in the in-
volved mesentery (arrow). (c) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image shows mesenteric haziness and a tumoral
pseudocapsule (arrow) at the interface between normal and affected mesentery. (d) Coronal contrast-
enhanced CT image shows mesenteric haziness, the fat-ring sign, and a tumoral pseudocapsule (arrow).

lipodystrophy, and retractile mesenteritis—can
further add to the confusion.

Pathophysiology and Associations
As mentioned earlier, sclerosing mesenteritis is
an umbrella term for a spectrum of conditions.
Sclerosing mesenteritis is categorized into three
subtypes—mesenteric panniculitis, mesenteric
lipodystrophy, and retractile mesenteritis—on the
basis of the predominant histopathologic finding
in the affected mesentery. Although most patients
with the condition have a range of mesenteric
findings, usually one histopathologic feature is
predominant at a given time: chronic inflamma-
tion in mesenteric panniculitis, fat necrosis in
mesenteric lipodystrophy, and fibrosis in retrac-
tile mesenteritis. The condition most commonly
involves the small bowel mesentery but may oc-
casionally involve the mesocolon and rarely the
omentum or retroperitoneum (3).

As mentioned earlier, sclerosing mesenteritis is
now considered to be one of the abdominal com-
ponents of ISD and hence can coexist with the

other conditions in that subgroup, such as scleros-
ing cholangitis, RPF, and IPT. It is also associated
with other fibrosing conditions such as Riedel
thyroiditis and orbital pseudotumor (3). An as-
sociation with malignancy—especially lymphoma,
melanoma, and breast, lung, and colon cancers—
has also been reported (4), most commonly with
the mesenteric panniculitis subtype (5). Reports
of associations with infection, trauma, and surgery
also exist in the literature (2).

Imaging Findings
Cross-sectional imaging findings of sclerosing
mesenteritis range from haziness of the mesentery
to a soft-tissue mass at the mesenteric root (3).
The following findings and named signs character-
ize the disorder:

Misty Mesentery Sign.—The misty mesentery
sign refers to the presence of subtle increased
attenuation in the mesentery at CT, often associ-
ated with small to borderline-sized nodes (Fig 1).

1056

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

This finding represents chronic inflammation of
the mesentery and hence is most commonly as-
sociated with the mesenteric panniculitis subtype.
However, misty mesentery is a nonspecific sign
and can be seen in any infiltrating process involv-
ing the mesentery, such as hemorrhage, edema,
or malignancy (especially lymphoma) (3).

Fat-Ring Sign.—The fat-ring sign appears at CT
as preservation of fatty attenuation, in the form of
a low-attenuation halo, around the vessels of the
involved mesentery (Fig 1b, 1d). Typically associ-
ated with mesenteric panniculitis and mesenteric
lipodystrophy, this sign can help differentiate
sclerosing mesenteritis from other mesenteric
infiltrating processes.

Tumoral Pseudocapsule.—A band of soft-tissue
attenuation called the tumoral pseudocapsule
at the edge of the affected mesentery (Fig 1c,
1d) has been reported in up to 50% of cases of
sclerosing mesenteritis, mainly of the mesenteric
panniculitis and mesenteric lipodystrophy sub-
types (2). As with the fat-ring sign, the tumoral
pseudocapsule is an important distinguishing
feature of sclerosing mesenteritis.

Mesenteric Root Mass.—The most common
imaging appearance of sclerosing mesenteritis is
a mass at the root of the small bowel mesentery.
While the mass is typically ill-defined, heteroge-
neous, and of relatively reduced attenuation in
mesenteric panniculitis, it is usually denser, more
homogeneous, and better-defined in retractile
mesenteritis. As the name suggests, retractile
mesenteritis is often associated with desmoplastic
response and spiculation in relation to the mass
(Fig 2). Calcification (Fig 2b) and cystic changes
may also be seen in the mass (3).

As the disease progresses, findings related to
progressive fibrosis and shortening of the mesen-
tery may be seen. These include compression of
the mesenteric vessels with formation of collateral
vessels and possible bowel ischemia. Bowel may
also be more directly involved by progressive en-
casement, although bowel involvement is much
less frequent than in lymphoma (2,3), the main
differential diagnosis for sclerosing mesenteritis.

Differential Diagnosis
Owing to the nonspecific nature of its imaging
findings, sclerosing mesenteritis has a wide differ-
ential diagnosis.

Figure 2.  Retractile mesenteritis. Coronal contrast-
enhanced (a) and axial nonenhanced (b) CT images
in different patients with retractile mesenteritis show
spiculated mesenteric masses with markedly different
degrees of calcification.

Lymphoma is probably the most important

condition mimicking sclerosing mesenteritis.
As with sclerosing mesenteritis, lymphoma can
also manifest as a mesenteric mass with nodes;
typically, however, no mesenteric calcification is
noted in lymphoma (except after treatment). Also
unlike sclerosing mesenteritis, lymphoma does
not typically cause compressive narrowing of the
mesenteric vessels despite encasing them. While
treated lymphoma can also produce a misty mes-
entery appearance, the presence of a fat-ring sign
and tumoral pseudocapsule can help differentiate
mesenteric panniculitis from lymphoma.

The other differential diagnoses for mesenteric

panniculitis include IPT, Crohn disease with fi-

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1057

Figure 3.  Sclerosing peritonitis. Axial non-
enhanced CT image shows visceral and pari-
etal peritoneal calcification.

demonstrated by the well-recognized association
of SEP with continuous ambulatory peritoneal
dialysis (CAPD). The overall prevalence of SEP
in patients receiving CAPD has been reported
to be 0.7%, but it increases to 19.4% in patients
receiving CAPD for more than 8 years (6,12). A
similar association also exists with ventriculoperi-
toneal and peritoneovenous shunts (9,13).

Other associations include tuberculosis (14),

sarcoidosis (15), familial Mediterranean fever,
gastrointestinal malignancy, protein S defi-
ciency, liver transplantation, fibrogenic foreign
material, and luteinized ovarian thecoma (9).
It has also been reported with use of the b-
blocker practolol (16). Foo et al (7) reported an
idiopathic form of the condition in adolescent
females from tropical and subtropical countries;
however, the same form has now been described
in male and pediatric patients from nontropical
regions as well (9,17).

Imaging Findings
The main imaging features of sclerosing peritoni-
tis pertain to appearances of the abnormal perito-
neum and of its encasing effects on the bowel (6).
Smooth thickening and enhancement of the

peritoneum is the most common appearance
and is clearly identified at CT, although the ab-
dominal cocoon has also been described at US
(18). Peritoneal calcification, involving both pa-
rietal and visceral peritoneum, is often seen (19)
and may be identified at CT (Fig 3), US, and
plain radiography. Although diffuse peritoneal

brofatty proliferation, and mesenteric lipogenic
liposarcoma (2).

The primary differential diagnosis for retractile

mesenteritis is mesenteric carcinoid, which also
appears as a spiculated mesenteric root mass with
possible calcification. Carcinoid may be differ-
entiated from retractile mesenteritis by means of
uptake at octreotide and somatostatin scintigra-
phy, elevated levels of blood serotonin and urine
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, and typical clinical
features, especially carcinoid syndrome with liver
metastases. The other differential diagnoses for
retractile mesenteritis include desmoid (mesen-
teric fibromatosis) and carcinomatosis.

Sclerosing Peritonitis

Sclerosing peritonitis is a condition marked by
chronic fibrotic thickening of the peritoneum (6).
In the more severe version of the condition—
SEP—the thickened abnormal peritoneum can
progress to encase small bowel loops in a fibrocol-
lagenous “abdominal cocoon” (7), eventually re-
sulting in recurrent small bowel obstruction.

Nomenclature
Sclerosing peritonitis has been referred to in the
literature by multiple alternate terms, including
encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis, peritonitis chronica
fibrosa incapsulata, and peritoneal fibrosing syn-
drome (8–10).

Pathophysiology and Associations
While the exact etiology of the condition is un-
clear, chronic irritation of the peritoneum has
been postulated as the cause (11). This is best

1058

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 4.  SEP. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image shows thickened peritoneum forming an abdominal
cocoon (arrows), causing clustering of small bowel loops. A loculated fluid collection (arrowhead) is also seen.
(b) Image from a barium small bowel follow-through study shows abnormal clustering of loops (arrow).

calcification is typically associated with advanced
encapsulating peritonitis, severe encapsulation
may also occur in the absence of peritoneal calci-
fication (Fig 4a) (6).

With progression of the disease, there is en-
capsulation of the small bowel by the abdominal
cocoon (Fig 4), resulting in clustering of small
bowel loops as seen at radiography and barium
studies (Fig 4b). The diffuse inflammatory
process also involves the small bowel along its
antimesenteric wall, causing mural fibrosis and
thickening (20). This in turn can lead to adhe-
sions between adjoining bowel loops, narrow-
ing of the bowel lumen, and eventually small
bowel obstruction (6). Small bowel necrosis and
perforation may also occur (6,21). Small bowel
changes and the relationship of the bowel to the
encapsulating peritoneum are best visualized with
contrast-enhanced CT.

The thickened fibrotic peritoneum can also
cause formation of loculated fluid collections (Fig
4a); this is especially so with CAPD-associated
peritoneal sclerosis with loculation of peritoneal
dialysate (6,12).

Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis for sclerosing peritoni-
tis includes other causes of peritoneal calcifica-
tion such as tuberculosis, amyloidosis, hyper-
parathyroidism, pseudomyxoma peritonei, and
peritoneal carcinomatosis. Meconium peritonitis
may be considered in the neonate (6,21).

Other causes of small bowel obstruction can
mimic the findings of sclerosing peritonitis—es-
pecially internal hernia, which, like sclerosing

peritonitis, can produce abnormal clustering of
small bowel loops (9).

Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis
PSC is an uncommon idiopathic condition charac-
terized by chronic inflammation and progressive fi-
brosis involving the biliary tree. The disorder leads
to multifocal intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary
strictures, cholestasis, and eventually biliary cirrho-
sis (22). The disease is commoner in young males,
manifesting with clinical and biochemical evidence
of cholestasis, typically in the 4th decade of life.

Nomenclature
Sclerosing cholangitis has also been referred to in
the literature as fibrosing cholangitis, stenosing chol-
angitis, and chronic obliterative cholangitis (23).
As its name suggests, PSC is an idiopathic
condition. Clinical and cholangiographic findings
identical to those of PSC have also been reported
in relation to distinct pathologic processes causing
biliary obstruction; these conditions are grouped
under the term secondary sclerosing cholangitis
(SSC). Well-known causes of SSC include intra-
ductal stone disease, surgical or blunt abdominal
trauma, hepatic intraarterial chemotherapy, and
recurrent pancreatitis. More recently described as-
sociations of SSC include recurrent pyogenic chol-
angitis and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS)–associated cholangiopathy (24).

Patients who have clinical, biochemical, and
histologic features compatible with PSC but nor-
mal appearances at cholangiography are classified
as having small-duct PSC. Small-duct PSC is a
potentially progressive disease but is associated
with a better long-term prognosis than is large-
duct PSC (25).

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1059

Figure 5.  PSC in a 29-year-
old woman with ulcerative
colitis. (a) Coronal maximum
intensity projection (MIP)
image from MR cholangio-
pancreatography shows a tight
focal annular stricture in the
mid common bile duct (CBD)
(straight arrow) with proximal
choledocholithiasis (arrow-
head) and a long-segment
stricture in the distal CBD
(curved arrow). Note the
beaded appearance of the
intrahepatic ductal system.
(b) Image from T-tube chol-
angiography shows the CBD
stricture and beaded intrahe-
patic ducts. Arrow = stent in
the CBD. (c) Windowed axial
contrast-enhanced CT image
shows periductal enhancement
(arrow) around the CBD.

reported with ulcerative colitis. Three percent
to 4% of patients with inflammatory bowel dis-
ease have PSC (27). PSC is also associated with
other chronic fibrosing conditions such as Riedel
thyroiditis and orbital pseudotumor. Association
with infiltrative disorders such as sarcoidosis and
amyloidosis has also been reported (24).

PSC is frequently associated with a signifi-
cantly increased risk of malignancy. In addition
to a 161-fold increased risk for hepatobiliary can-
cer (incidence of cholangiocarcinoma reported
to be 1%–1.5% per year), PSC patients show 10-
fold and 14-fold increased risks for colorectal and
pancreatic cancers, respectively, in comparison
with the general population (27). Cholangiocar-
cinoma does not appear to occur in patients with
small-duct PSC unless the disease has progressed
to large-duct PSC (25).

Imaging Findings
PSC is diagnosed in patients who have clini-
cal and biochemical features of cholestasis and
typical cholangiographic findings at imaging, in
whom secondary causes of sclerosing cholangitis
have been excluded.

US may show changes predominantly in the
extrahepatic ductal system, such as ductal dilata-
tion and choledocholithiasis. Cholangiographic
findings (Fig 5a, 5b) form the mainstay of im-
aging diagnosis in PSC. The typical cholangio-
graphic findings include multifocal strictures,

Pathophysiology and Associations
As mentioned earlier, the exact etiology of PSC is
unclear. Along with autoimmune pancreatitis, scle-
rosing mesenteritis, and RPF, PSC is now consid-
ered a key abdominal component of the recently
described group of IgG4-related sclerosing dis-
orders. Even earlier, the association of PSC with
autoimmune disorders such as Sjögren syndrome,
systemic lupus erythematosus, and rheumatoid
arthritis, and the response of PSC to treatment
with steroids, had led to theories that PSC is an
immune-mediated obliterative cholangitis (24). In
addition, a large number of autoantibodies such
as anti–neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)
and antinuclear antibody have been detected in
patients with PSC, but the specificity and titer of
these antibodies are generally low (26).

PSC is intimately associated with inflam-
matory bowel disease, with an 80% association

1060

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

segmental dilatation, ductal webs and diverticula,
and cholestasis-related choledocholithiasis. Wall
thickening and enhancement of the extrahepatic
ductal system may be seen (28) (Fig 5c), al-
though significant periductal soft tissue (>1.5 cm
thick) with delayed enhancement should raise the
possibility of cholangiocarcinoma (22).

Early in the disease, short, randomly distributed

annular biliary strictures are noted, which can
involve the intrahepatic and extrahepatic ducts.
Ductal dilatation is often only minimal, despite the
degree of stenosis related to the strictures. Multi-
focal strictures alternating with minimally dilated
intervening ductal segments give rise to the classic
beaded appearance of PSC (22).

Localized high-grade strictures of the larger
ducts, called dominant strictures, may be super-
imposed on diffuse ductal changes and are an im-
portant imaging finding of PSC, found in approx-
imately 45% of patients. A dominant stricture has
been defined as ductal stenosis with a luminal di-
ameter of 1.5 mm or less in the CBD and 1 mm
or less in the right and left hepatic ducts (29).
As the disease progresses, worsening obliterative
cholangitis results in the characteristic “pruned
tree” appearance caused by the obliteration and
subsequent lack of visualization of the peripheral
intrahepatic ducts at cholangiography.

While endoscopic retrograde cholangiopan-
creatography (ERCP) has traditionally been con-
sidered the standard of reference in diagnosing
PSC, MR cholangiopancreatography has rapidly
gained acceptance, mainly due to its noninva-
sive nature. At MR cholangiopancreatography,
ductal stenosis is usually inferred on the basis of
prestenotic dilatation, which is typically mild in
PSC, as described earlier. Thus, ERCP is usually
better in detecting early stenosis; however, visu-
alization of peripheral ducts may be better at MR
cholangiopancreatography due to the difficulty
of distending peripheral ducts past a central-duct
dominant stricture at ERCP (Fig 5a). ERCP also
has the added advantage of the ability to perform
concurrent therapeutic interventions in the ducts,
such as dilatation or stent placement.

Differential Diagnosis
Imaging findings of PSC are indistinguishable
from those of SSC. As mentioned earlier, second-
ary causes of sclerosing cholangitis need to be

excluded by nonimaging means before a diagno-
sis of PSC can be made.

The key differential diagnosis for PSC is chol-

angiocarcinoma, especially the periductal infil-
trating type (30). Cholangiographic features sug-
gestive of cholangiocarcinoma include an irregu-
lar high-grade ductal stricture with shouldered
margins, rapid progression of strictures, marked
ductal dilatation proximal to strictures (as men-
tioned earlier, PSC produces only minimal ductal
dilatation), and significant periductal soft tissue,
typically with delayed enhancement (22). While a
high-grade ductal stricture is more often benign
than malignant, a dominant stricture should al-
ways raise the possibility of cholangiocarcinoma,
especially since cholangiocarcinoma may develop
in 10%–15% of PSC cases.

Retroperitoneal Fibrosis
RPF is characterized by development of aggres-
sive confluent fibroproliferative masses in the
retroperitoneal space, leading to progressive
encasement of the retroperitoneal structures,
especially the ureters (31). A rare condition with
a prevalence of 1 in 200,000 (32), it is typically
seen in men (two to three times more often than
in women) between the 5th and 7th decades of
life (31,33).

Nomenclature
Alternate names for RPF include Ormond disease
(34), Gerota fasciitis, periureteritis fibrosa, perirenal
fasciitis, sclerosing lipogranuloma (35), sclerosing
retroperitoneal granuloma (36), nonspecific retroperi-
toneal inflammation, sclerosing retroperitonitis, ret-
roperitoneal vasculitis with perivascular fibrosis, and
chronic periaortitis (31,37).

Pathophysiology and Associations
RPF is idiopathic in more than 70% of cases
(31). Up to 15% of patients have additional fi-
brotic processes outside the retroperitoneum, the
most notable being mediastinal fibrosis, Riedel
thyroiditis, sclerosing cholangitis, sclerosing mes-
enteritis, and orbital pseudotumor (33,37).

RPF is often seen in association with athero-

sclerosis, the fibrotic mass encasing a severely
atherosclerotic vessel, usually the aorta (Fig 6a,
6b). In these cases, it has been postulated that
the fibrosis develops as an immune response to
leakage of an insoluble lipid—ceroid—from the
atheromatous plaque into the perivascular tis-

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1061

Figure 6.  RPF. (a, b) Axial delayed-phase (a) and coronal venous phase (b) contrast-enhanced
CT images show fibrous plaque with delayed enhancement (arrowhead in a) encasing a markedly
atherosclerotic aorta. Note the early encasement of the left ureter (arrow in a). (c, d) Axial T2-
weighted (c) and axial arterial phase contrast-enhanced fat-saturated (d) MR images in another
patient show encasement of the inferior mesenteric artery (arrow in d). The fibrous plaque does not
elevate the aorta off the underlying vertebral body, a typical finding in benign RPF.

sues (38). On the same lines, the coexistence of
RPF in association with autoimmune disorders
such as p-ANCA–associated polyarteritis no-
dosa (39) and IgG4-related sclerosing disorders
(40,41) and its response to steroids have raised
the possibility that RPF is of autoimmune origin.
As mentioned earlier, RPF is now considered an
important abdominal component of the group of
IgG4-related sclerosing disorders.

The most common known cause of RPF is
use of methysergide, an ergot derivative, in treat-
ment of migraine. Other ergot derivatives linked
to RPF include lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)

and bromocriptine (42). Beta blockers, methyl-
dopa, and hydralazine have also been reported to
be associated with RPF (37). RPF is also associ-
ated with infectious and inflammatory processes,
retroperitoneal hemorrhage (37), smoking, and
asbestos exposure (43).

Malignancy is associated with up to 8% of
RPF cases (33). It is postulated that desmoplas-
tic response elicited from small retroperitoneal
metastatic deposits results in development of
a confluent fibrotic process that is difficult to

1062

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

differentiate from RPF due to other causes, es-
pecially in patients with no known primary ma-
lignancy (37). Malignancies reported with this
association include breast, lung, thyroid, gastro-
intestinal, and genitourinary cancers, as well as
lymphomas and some sarcomas (33,37).

Imaging Findings
RPF begins as a confluent fibrotic plaque, typi-
cally below the aortic bifurcation at the L4-5
level. It can then extend contiguously along the
midline retroperitoneum, usually in a superior
direction, encasing the aorta, IVC, and eventually
the ureters, causing hydronephroureterosis. Typi-
cally, the process does not show lateral extension
beyond the lateral margins of the psoas muscles
(37); also, the fibrotic plaque characteristically
does not cause anterior displacement of the aorta
and IVC from the spine (31,37). Further pro-
gression may show extension toward the renal
hila, duodenum, pancreas, porta hepatis, and
spleen. Extension cranially into the mediastinum
and caudally into the pelvis can occur.

Before the advent of cross-sectional imaging,
excretory urography was the imaging modality of
choice for diagnosis of RPF. Thus, the condition
had to have progressed to involve the renal tracts
for a diagnosis to be made at urography. The
findings include medial deviation and tapering of
the middle third of the ureters at the L4-5 level,
with proximal hydronephroureterosis and delayed
excretion of contrast material (31,44).

Cross-sectional imaging, particularly CT and

MR imaging, has now replaced urography in
diagnosis and follow-up of RPF. These modali-
ties rely on demonstration of the fibrotic plaque
and the effects of progressive encasement by the
plaque. At CT, the plaque typically has the same
attenuation as muscle (Fig 6a, 6b). At MR imag-
ing (Fig 6c, 6d), it has low signal intensity on T1-
and T2-weighted images.

High T2 signal may be seen in the plaque, a
finding indicative of inflammatory edema and as

Figure 7.  RPF in a 56-year-old woman. Axial venous
phase contrast-enhanced CT image shows RPF extend-
ing superiorly and laterally to encase the left kidney.

such, a more active phase of disease (31,45). The
degree of enhancement of the plaque is also said
to correlate with the level of disease activity. The
active phase of the disease may show marked en-
hancement of the plaque, while chronic disease is
marked by little or no venous phase enhancement,
and delayed enhancement (46,47). Unusual exten-
sions of the plaque, such as encasement of the kid-
neys or pancreas, may also be evaluated (Fig 7).

Owing to the technical difficulties in imaging
the retroperitoneum, US is a suboptimal imaging
modality for visualization of the fibrotic plaque.
When identified, the plaque is seen as a hypo-
echoic prevertebral mass with smooth margins,
usually without flow at Doppler imaging (31,37).
Encasement effects such as hydronephrosis and
rarely biliary dilatation may also be seen at US.
Scintigraphic imaging with gallium 67 and
fluorine 18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron
emission tomography (PET) has been shown to
demonstrate isotope uptake paralleling the degree
of activity of RPF, with avid uptake in the active
phase and little or none in the chronic phase (31).

Differential Diagnosis
As mentioned earlier, malignancy accounts for up
to 8% of cases of RPF. Multiple imaging findings
have been proposed as indicators of a malignant

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1063

Classification of Fibromatoses

Superficial (fascial)
  Palmar fibromatosis (Dupuytren disease)
  Plantar fibromatosis (Ledderhose disease)

Juvenile aponeurotic fibroma
  Infantile digital fibromatosis
  Penile fibromatosis (Peyronie disease)
Deep (musculoaponeurotic)
  Extraabdominal fibromatosis
  Abdominal fibromatosis

  Abdominal wall fibromatosis
  Intraabdominal fibromatosis

  Mesenteric fibromatosis
  Retroperitoneal fibromatosis
  Pelvic fibromatosis

  Fibromatosis associated with Gardner syndrome
  Infantile myofibromatosis
  Fibromatosis colli

cause of RPF, including anterior displacement of
the aorta by the retroperitoneal mass, marginal
lobulation of the mass, and edema, Doppler flow,
contrast enhancement, and isotope uptake in
relation to the mass (48). However, results of im-
aging are often suboptimal in making this distinc-
tion, and biopsy may be required to definitively
exclude malignancy (31,37).

Metastatic adenopathy, especially confluent
adenopathy as in lymphoma, is an important dif-
ferential diagnosis for RPF. As with malignant
RPF, metastatic retroperitoneal adenopathy typi-
cally elevates the aorta off the underlying verte-
bral body (49), although exceptions to this guide-
line have been reported (50). Other differential
diagnoses include retroperitoneal amyloidosis
and occasionally subacute retroperitoneal hemor-
rhage (37). Atypical locations of RPF can widen
the differential diagnosis. For example, RPF in
the female pelvis has been reported to mimic cer-
vical carcinoma (51).

The Fibromatoses

The term fibromatosis refers to a wide range of
clinicopathologic conditions with benign pro-
liferation of fibrous tissue, characterized by in-
filtrative growth pattern and frequent tendency

to recur locally, although lacking in metastatic
potential (52,53).

Nomenclature and Classification
No single entity in this article better illustrates
the nomenclature-associated confusion of chronic
fibrosing conditions than the fibromatoses. The
group is divided into many subcategories con-
taining multiple entities, most of them with alter-
nate names and eponyms.

Fibromatoses are broadly categorized as super-

ficial (fascial) and deep (musculoaponeurotic).
Superficial fibromatoses are generally small and
slow-growing (typically <5 cm), while deep fibro-
matoses are larger, more aggressive masses that
may show rapid growth (54,55). Superficial fibro-
matoses rarely involve deeper structures, while
deep fibromatoses have a variable tendency to
infiltrate surrounding visceral organs. Superficial
and deep fibromatoses are further subclassified as
in the Table.

Owing to their clinical behavior, deep fibroma-

toses are now more commonly referred to as ag-
gressive fibromatoses. However, they continue to
be frequently referred to by the older term desmoid
(Greek desmoid meaning tendon-like), as used in
1838 by Johannes Mueller (56). In this article, the
terms aggressive fibromatosis and desmoid are used
interchangeably to describe deep fibromatoses. In
2002, the Committee for Classification of Soft Tis-
sue Tumors of the World Health Organization des-
ignated the term desmoid-type fibromatosis for deep
fibromatoses (57); this term encompasses extraab-
dominal, abdominal wall, and intrabdominal fibro-
matoses (52). Use of terms like nonmetastasizing
fibrosarcoma and fibrosarcoma grade 1 to describe
deep fibromatoses has been phased out of the lit-
erature due to their unpleasant connotations (58).
Among the fibromatoses, abdominal imaging
deals with essentially two entities: abdominal fi-
bromatosis and penile fibromatosis.

Abdominal Fibromatoses
Desmoid-type fibromatoses or aggressive fibroma-
toses in the abdomen are further classified on the

1064

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 8.  Gardner syndrome in a 34-year-old
woman. (a, b) Axial contrast-enhanced CT
image (a) and fat-saturated T2-weighted MR im-
age (b) show mesenteric aggressive fibromatosis.
Note the T2 hyperintensity (arrow in b), a finding
indicative of high cellularity and myxoid stroma. The
patient underwent total colectomy for FAP and rec-
tal cancer. (c) Axial nonenhanced CT image (bone
window) shows a left mandibular osteoma (arrow).

basis of their anatomic location as (a) abdominal
wall fibromatosis and (b) intraabdominal fibroma-
tosis. Intraabdominal fibromatosis is subclassified,
again on the basis of location, into mesenteric, ret-
roperitoneal, and pelvic fibromatoses (59).

Abdominal wall desmoids may be seen at any
age but show a peak incidence in the 3rd decade.
Intraabdominal fibromatosis has no gender or age
predilection and has been reported in patients
between 14 and 75 years of age (52,59).

Nomenclature.—As mentioned earlier, both
terms—desmoid and aggressive fibromatosis—
are used in this article to describe abdominal
fibromatoses.

Pathophysiology and Associations.—The ma-
jority of abdominal fibromatoses are sporadic.
However, fibromatoses are unique among chronic
fibrosing conditions in that a proportion of them
are inherited. The notable genetic association of
abdominal fibromatosis is with Gardner syn-
drome (discussed later).

Abdominal wall desmoids are typically seen
in young women of childbearing age (59), occur-
ring within the 1st year after childbirth or during
pregnancy, and with use of oral contraceptives
(52,60). The exact etiology of abdominal wall
desmoids is uncertain and the majority of cases
are idiopathic. However, estrogenic hormones,

trauma (including surgery), and genetic abnor-
malities have been described as potential caus-
ative factors (52).

The pattern of occurrence implicates estrogen
as a growth factor for fibroblasts, and regression
of the lesions after menopause or oophorectomy
has been reported (52,60). Abdominal wall des-
moids may also arise in areas of previous abdomi-
nal surgery such as cesarean section scars, indi-
cating that trauma is an important contributory
factor, as in other desmoid-type fibromatoses
(52). Such lesions arising from scars have been
described as cicatricial fibromatoses (61).

As mentioned earlier, the majority of intraab-

dominal fibromatoses are sporadic (59). How-
ever, 9%–18% of cases of mesenteric fibromatosis
are associated with familial adenomatous pol-
yposis (FAP), specifically the Gardner syndrome

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1065

Figure 9.  Aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid) of the abdominal wall. Axial (a) and sagittal (b) contrast-
enhanced CT images show a well-defined lobulated mass arising from the anterior abdominal wall.

variant of FAP (59,62); there is no gender predi-
lection in these patients. Gardner syndrome, also
known as familial colorectal polyposis, is charac-
terized by the presence of multiple polyps in the
colon together with extracolonic disease that may
include osteomas of the skull, thyroid malignan-
cies, epidermoid cysts, fibromas, sebaceous cysts,
and desmoids (Fig 8). Inheritance of FAP is au-
tosomal dominant with variable penetrance (63).
Desmoids associated with FAP are multiple
and small and may be intraabdominal or involve
the abdominal wall, whereas sporadic desmoids
are generally singular (64). In addition, FAP-
associated desmoids have a higher rate of recur-
rence after resection than do sporadic desmoids.
Prior abdominal surgery, especially total colec-
tomy (usually performed prophylactically to pre-
vent development of colorectal cancer), is an im-
portant risk factor for development of mesenteric
fibromatosis in patients with FAP (59); the con-
dition typically develops within 4 years of surgery
(Fig 8a, 8b). Eighty-three percent of patients with
FAP and mesenteric fibromatosis have a history
of prior surgery, while only 10% of those with
sporadic mesenteric fibromatosis have undergone
previous surgery (59).

Imaging Findings.—CT and MR imaging are the
preferred modalities for imaging assessment of
abdominal desmoid. Appearances at CT and MR
imaging are variable, nonspecific, and reflective
of the underlying histologic characteristics, vascu-
larity, and amount of collagenous and myxoid
stroma in the lesion (58). The masses may appear
well-circumscribed or ill-defined and infiltrating.

At CT, they may be homogeneous and isoat-
tenuating to muscle when the stroma is predom-
inantly collagenous; myxoid stroma produces
a typically hypoattenuating appearance. The
masses may appear striated or whorled when
alternating collagenous and myxoid stroma is
present (59). Contrast enhancement is variable;
mild to moderate parenchymal phase enhance-
ment is typically noted, and delayed enhance-
ment may be seen.

At MR imaging, most lesions are hypoin-
tense to muscle on T1-weighted images; on
T2-weighted images, signal intensity is variable
and the lesions can have heterogeneous inter-
mediate or high signal intensity. Bands of low
signal intensity in the lesion are a typical finding,
seen in 62% of patients, and correspond to col-
lagen bundles (55,59). High signal intensity on
T2-weighted images (Fig 8b) is related to high
cellularity and myxoid stroma (55,59,62). It has
been suggested that actively growing desmoids
have higher T2 signal intensity due to increased
cellularity (65).

Abdominal wall desmoids arise from the mus-
culoaponeurotic structures of the abdominal wall
and most frequently originate from the rectus
abdominis and internal oblique muscles and their
fascial coverings (52,60,66) (Fig 9). A linear ex-
tension (fascial tail sign) along the superficial fas-
cia at the margins of the lesion is a helpful imag-
ing clue in radiologic interpretation of abdominal
wall desmoid (52). Cicatricial fibromatoses typi-
cally show infiltrating appearances (Fig 10).

1066

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 10.  Aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid) of the abdominal wall in a 29-year-old woman with
a palpable lump. The lesion occurred at the site of a cesarean section scar (cicatricial fibromatosis).
(a–c) Transverse gray-scale US image (a) and axial venous phase (b) and delayed phase (c) contrast-
enhanced CT images show an ill-defined infiltrating mass (arrow in b) with delayed enhancement
(arrow in c). (d–f) Corresponding axial T2-weighted (d), nonenhanced T1-weighted (e), and delayed
contrast-enhanced fat-saturated (f) MR images show the same findings as at CT. The mass has the
typical imaging characteristics of fibrous tissue.

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1067

Figure 11.  Mesenteric aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid). Axial contrast-enhanced (a) and coronal
contrast-enhanced MIP (b) CT images show infiltrating mesenteric soft tissue.

Figure 12.  Retroperitoneal aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid) in a 24-year-old woman. (a, b) Axial delayed
phase (a) and coronal venous phase (b) contrast-enhanced CT images show an infiltrating mass (arrow) in
the right retroperitoneum with delayed enhancement. (c) Axial delayed phase contrast-enhanced CT image 3
years after resection shows local recurrence (arrow).

Intraabdominal desmoids are classified into
mesenteric (Figs 8a, 8b, 11), retroperitoneal (Fig
12), and pelvic desmoids. They can have mass-
like or infiltrating appearances; both forms can
coexist in the same patient (62). Mass-like des-
moids can show significant displacement of con-
tiguous structures, while infiltrating lesions cause

compressive encasement. Encasement can mani-
fest as bowel obstruction and vascular occlusion
with ischemia in mesenteric fibromatosis. Retro-
peritoneal desmoid can cause encasement of the
ureters and resultant hydronephroureterosis.

1068

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 13.  Penile fibromatosis (Peyronie disease) in a 48-year-old man. Transverse (a) and longitudinal (b)
gray-scale US images show shadowing calcified plaques (white arrow) along the dorsal tunica albuginea. Black
arrows = corpora cavernosa, arrowhead = corpus spongiosum.

Differential Diagnosis.—Regardless of location,
malignancy is an important differential diagno-
sis in evaluation of desmoids. Abdominal wall
desmoids should be differentiated from malig-
nant processes such as lymphoma, metastases,
and soft-tissue sarcomas. Scar endometriosis is
an important differential diagnosis in patients
with desmoids at the site of a cesarean section
scar (67).

In intraabdominal desmoids, the main differ-
ential diagnoses for mesenteric fibromatoses are
malignant neoplasms of the mesentery such as
lymphoma, metastases, and soft-tissue sarcomas
such as leiomyosarcoma and malignant fibrous
histiocytoma. Other differential diagnoses include
IPT, extrapleural solitary fibrous tumor, and mes-
enteric gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)
(59). RPF and IPT may show imaging appear-
ances similar to that of retroperitoneal desmoid.
Benign and malignant pelvic neoplasms are the
most important mimics of pelvic fibromatosis.

Penile Fibromatosis
Penile fibromatosis (Peyronie disease) is a be-
nign acquired fibrotic condition characterized
by chronic inflammation leading to fibrosis and
focal thickening of the penile tunica albuginea
(68,69). It is a surprisingly common disorder
with a prevalence of 3%; the average age at pre-
sentation is 40–60 years. Patients with penile
fibromatosis present with painful penile indura-
tion and palpable albugineal plaques along the
corpora cavernosa, typically on the dorsal aspect
of the penis. The condition causes abnormal pe-
nile curvature and deformity of the penis during

erection (70,71) and is an important cause of
erectile dysfunction.

Nomenclature.—Penile fibromatosis, also known
as Peyronie disease and induratio penis plastica, is
categorized as a superficial fibromatosis (69).

Pathophysiology and Associations.—Although
the etiology of the condition is poorly under-
stood, the typical dorsal location of the plaques
and the presence of fibrin likely represent aber-
rant healing response to minor penile trauma
(71). There is a reported association of penile
fibromatosis in 16%–20% of cases with pal-
mar fibromatosis (Dupuytren contracture), an
autosomal dominant condition, thus indicating a
possible genetic basis for the disease (69,71). As-
sociations with other conditions such as plantar
fibromatosis, Paget disease of bone, diabetes mel-
litus, and gout have also been reported (72).

Imaging Findings.—Penile plaques are typically
seen dorsally on the penis but can also be seen
along the ventral and lateral aspects including
the intercorporeal septum (69); rarely, diffuse
involvement may be seen. US is most often the
initial imaging modality used. At US, the classic
appearance of plaque is focal hyperechoic thick-
ening of the tunica albuginea with shadowing
due to calcification (Fig 13); other less-common
appearances include focal nonshadowing echo-
genic thickening of the tunica, nodular echogenic
thickening of the intercorporeal septum, and
rarely isoechoic or hypoechoic plaques (69). At
MR imaging, plaques appear as low-signal-inten-
sity foci of thickening of the tunica albuginea on
both T1- and T2-weighted images; enhancement

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1069

Figure 14.  Incidentally detected penile fibromatosis (Peyronie disease). Axial (a) and sagittal (b) con-
trast-enhanced CT images show calcified plaques (arrowhead) at the typical site, along the dorsal tunica
albuginea of the penis.

of the plaque can be seen in the phase of active
inflammation (72).

The sensitivities of US (68%) and MR im-

aging (61%) for identifying the plaques are
relatively similar (73). While US is superior to
MR imaging in detection of calcific plaque, MR
imaging is superior in demonstrating plaque
enhancement and also accurately depicts the
penile deformity (72). US is useful in identify-
ing the relationship of plaque to surrounding
structures such as encasement of dorsal arteries
and the neurovascular bundle (may result in pe-
nile numbness after surgical correction) and the
cavernosal artery (arteriogenic cause of erectile
dysfunction) (70). The condition may be inciden-
tally detected at abdominal CT (Fig 14). Imaging
plays a key role in patient selection before surgery
and also in preoperative definition of the extent
of plaque and the deformity.

Differential Diagnosis.—While the majority
of patients with focal or diffuse penile indura-
tion have penile fibromatosis, other differential
diagnoses to consider include congenital penile
curvature, dorsal vein thrombosis (thrombosed
dorsal vein identified at imaging), penile calci-
phylaxis (acute life-threatening condition in
patients with end-stage renal disease, with oc-
clusion of flow to penile vessels and extensive
tunica and cavernosal arterial calcifications), and
other causes of penile fibrosis such as prolonged
priapism, trauma, removal of penile prostheses,
and prior intracavernosal injections for erectile
dysfunction. Penile malignancies may also mimic
penile fibromatosis (70).

Ovarian Fibromatosis
Ovarian fibromatosis is a rare benign condition
causing tumor-like enlargement of the ovaries.
Typically seen in younger patients (average age
at presentation, 25 years), it manifests as pain,
menstrual abnormalities, and occasionally viril-
ization (74).

Nomenclature
Despite similarity in nomenclature, ovarian fibro-
matosis is not considered one of the fibromatoses,
as mentioned earlier, although it is notable that
pelvic aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid) can sec-
ondarily involve the ovary (75). Conversely, ovar-
ian fibromatosis is confined to the ovaries and
does not demonstrate the locally invasive features
typical of the fibromatoses (74).

Pathophysiology and Associations
Ovarian fibromatosis is characterized by prolif-
eration of collagen-producing spindle cells sur-
rounding normal ovarian structures (76), with
collagenous thickening of the superficial cortex
(75). Despite these changes, there is partial pres-
ervation of normal ovarian structures within the
fibrous mass, a feature that has been reported to
allow differentiation of ovarian fibromatosis from
similar conditions (75,76).

Ovarian fibromatosis appears to be related to

massive ovarian edema (MOE) (77). MOE is
characterized by ovarian enlargement and stromal
edema; it differs from ovarian fibromatosis because
of the presence of edema, as opposed to fibrosis

1070

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

in the latter entity (74,77). Foci of stromal edema
similar to those in MOE have been reported in
roughly 50% of cases of ovarian fibromatosis (75).
It has been proposed that MOE is likely related to
chronic partial torsion of the ovary (78,79); ovar-
ian enlargement in fibromatosis could predispose
to torsion and hence to MOE.

Spurrell et al (80) reported a case of ovarian
fibromatosis with MOE associated with intraab-
dominal fibromatosis, sclerosing peritonitis, and
Meigs syndrome. At least two other cases of co-
existing abdominal and ovarian fibromatosis have
also been reported (81,82).

Imaging Findings
Unilateral involvement is commoner than bilat-
eral (75). US demonstrates an enlarged hetero-
geneously echogenic ovary with areas of acoustic
shadowing, an appearance characteristic of fibrous
tissue, with low flow at Doppler imaging. Low T1
and T2 signal areas are noted in an infiltrating pat-
tern at MR imaging, a finding that corresponds to
fibrous tissue, with little or no parenchymal phase
enhancement on contrast-enhanced images; de-
layed enhancement may be seen (74).

A “black garland” appearance has been re-
ported on T2-weighted images (Fig 15), which is
caused by fibrous tissue encasing the peripheral
aspect of the ovary (76). Nonspecific heteroge-
neous ovarian enlargement with enhancement
characteristics similar to those at MR imaging is
noted at CT (74). As mentioned earlier, at least
partial preservation of ovarian anatomy is seen
with all imaging modalities (Fig 15).

Differential Diagnosis
Ovarian neoplastic processes containing fibrous
tissue form the main differential diagnosis, since
they can also manifest as heterogeneous hypovas-
cular adnexal masses with acoustic shadowing at
US and as T1 and T2 hypointensity at MR imag-
ing. These lesions include Brenner tumor, ovarian
sex cord–stromal tumors such as fibromas and fi-
brothecomas, and Krukenberg tumor. All of these
lesions are better circumscribed than ovarian
fibromatosis, with the majority of Brenner tumors
showing calcification. Krukenberg tumors are
typically bilateral with avid enhancement. Partial
preservation of the ovarian parenchyma, as evi-
denced by visualization of follicles, also points to
the diagnosis of ovarian fibromatosis.

Figure 15.  Ovarian fibromatosis. Sagittal T2-weighted
MR image shows left ovarian fibromatosis. Note the
“black garland” (white arrow) and the relative preserva-
tion of ovarian architecture as evidenced by multiple
follicles, including a dominant follicle (black arrow).

Pelvic aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid) sec-

ondarily involving the ovaries is an important
differential diagnosis, but it is distinguished by
extraovarian involvement, which is not typical of
ovarian fibromatosis.

Inflammatory Pseudotumor
IPT is a rare nonneoplastic mass-forming lesion
characterized by fibroblastic or myofibroblastic
spindle cell proliferation, with varying degrees
of inflammatory cell infiltration (83,84). Initially
described in the lung, extrapulmonary instances
of this condition have been described in virtu-
ally all major organs. Presenting symptoms are
nonspecific and can include fever, weight loss,
anemia, and those related to mass effect from the
lesion (84).

Nomenclature
Numerous terms have been used in the litera-
ture to describe this condition. Some of these
include plasma cell granuloma, inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumor (IMT), inflammatory myo-
fibrohistiocytic proliferation, fibrous histiocytoma,
xanthoma, xanthogranuloma, fibrous xanthoma,
xanthomatous pseudotumor, pseudolymphoma,
plasma cell–histiocytoma complex, plasmacytoma,
solitary mast cell granuloma, and inflammatory
fibrosarcoma (84,85).

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1071

Figure 16.  IMT in a 42-year-old man. Axial venous phase (a) and coronal delayed phase (b) contrast-
enhanced CT images show a well-defined mass (black arrow) with delayed enhancement arising from
the second part of the duodenum. Note the associated mild dilatation of the pancreatic and biliary ducts
(white arrows in b). Histopathologic analysis demonstrated malignancy. IMT is considered by histopathol-
ogists to be a low-grade malignant neoplasm, distinct from IPT, which is a fibroinflammatory process.

IPT has been reported to be associated with
other autoimmune conditions, especially IgG4-
related sclerosing disorders such as autoimmune
pancreatitis and RPF, and is now considered
to be part of the IgG4-related constellation of
conditions. Other known associations include
trauma, surgery, malignancy, and infections in-
cluding Epstein-Barr virus, Mycobacterium, and
Actinomyces (84,87).

Imaging Findings
IPTs are most commonly seen in the lung and
orbit and are relatively rare in the abdomen and
pelvis. Multiple sites of involvement have been
reported in the abdomen; these include the liver,
spleen, pancreas, adrenal gland, kidney, retroperi-
toneum (Fig 17), diaphragm, mesentery, and gas-
trointestinal and genitourinary tracts (88).

Imaging appearances vary from an ill-defined

infiltrating process (Fig 18a–18g) to a well-
circumscribed soft-tissue mass (Fig 17). The
variation most likely corresponds to the differing
degrees of inflammatory and fibrotic components
in the lesion (84). Variable attenuation and echo-
genicity are noted at CT and US, respectively.
MR imaging may show low signal intensity on

Figure 17.  Retroperitoneal IPT. Axial contrast-en-
hanced CT image shows a well-circumscribed hetero-
geneously enhancing right retroperitoneal mass.

Pathophysiology and Associations
The exact pathophysiology of the disorder is
unclear. Postulates range from a primary inflam-
matory process to a low-grade malignancy with
marked inflammatory response; the range in no-
menclature from plasma cell–histiocytoma complex
to inflammatory fibrosarcoma demonstrates this
point. Indeed, of late, histopathologists have been
differentiating IMT as a low-grade mesenchy-
mal clonal malignancy with a low (<5%) risk of
metastases, regarding it as a separate entity from
IPT (86) (Fig 16).

1072

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1073

T1- and T2-weighted images due to the fibrotic
component (Fig 18d, 18e), along with absence of
restricted diffusion (Fig 18h).

Calcification may be seen at CT (Fig 18b).
Variable enhancement and Doppler flow are also
noted; delayed enhancement may be seen in the
fibrotic component (Fig 18g) (84,88). In general,
hepatic, splenic, retroperitoneal, and genitouri-
nary lesions are well-circumscribed, while those
involving the gastrointestinal tract and biliary tree
are ill-defined and infiltrating. Mesenteric lesions
may manifest in either of the two forms (84).

Differential Diagnosis
IPT has a wide imaging differential diagnosis due
to its varied radiologic appearances. IPT should
be considered in the differential diagnosis of
any soft-tissue mass in the abdomen and pelvis.
Important entities in the differential diagnosis
include malignancies such as hepatocellular car-
cinoma, gastric carcinoma, cholangiocarcinoma,
pancreatic carcinoma, and carcinomatosis (88)
and other fibrosing conditions such as RPF, scle-
rosing mesenteritis, and abdominal fibromatosis.

Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis
NSF is a chronic fibrosing condition similar to
scleroderma, identified predominantly in the skin
and subcutaneous tissues, although it can involve
multiple other organs including skeletal muscle,
bone, and the lung, heart, pericardium, testis,
and esophagus (89). The disease usually mani-
fests as skin thickness and pruritis but may prog-
ress to cause contractures and joint immobility.
Death may result in some patients, presumably
due to visceral organ involvement.

NSF does not show gender or race predilec-
tion. NSF has been reported in children and the
elderly but tends to affect the middle-aged most
commonly (90).

Nomenclature
The condition was initially described in 2000 as
one that manifests as thickening and hardening
of the skin, predominantly in patients with end-
stage renal disease, especially those receiving di-

alysis (91). This accounted for the disorder being
initially named nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy.
Later reports showing that it also affects skeletal
muscle, joints, and the viscera prompted a change
in nomenclature to NSF (89).

Pathophysiology and Associations
The exact pathophysiology of NSF is unclear. As
mentioned earlier, the first report of NSF was
on 15 patients with end-stage renal disease (91),
with multiple subsequent studies confirming the
association of NSF with chronic kidney disease,
especially dialysis.

As mentioned, NSF shows similarities to

scleroderma. However, unlike scleroderma, NSF
does not show a gender predilection and does
not involve the face or have associated serologic
markers (89).

Associations of NSF with hypercoagulability
and thrombotic events, surgical procedures, and
hepatic and pulmonary disease have been reported
(92). In 2006, gadolinium was identified as a pos-
sible trigger for NSF (93), followed by a report in
2007 of detection of gadolinium in the skin and
soft tissues of patients with NSF (94). Worldwide
reevaluation of the use of gadolinium contrast ma-
terial ensued as a result of those studies.

In 2007, the U.S. Food and Drug Administra-

tion mandated a boxed warning about the risk
of NSF on all gadolinium-based contrast agents.
Use of these contrast agents in patients with renal
disease is now more controlled, with most clinical
practices following prescribed guidelines (95) and
departmental protocols designed to limit the dose
of gadolinium contrast material, based on degrees
of renal impairment.

Imaging Findings
NSF can show variable imaging findings, most
of them relating to skin and subcutaneous soft-
tissue thickening as well as joint contractures.
Conventional radiographs and mammograms
may show skin thickening with occasional calcific
foci. CT and US show changes of skin thickening

Figure 18.  Hepatic hilar IMT in a 67-year-old man with obstructive jaundice. (a–c) Axial venous phase contrast-
enhanced CT images show infiltrating soft tissue (arrow in a and b) containing foci of calcification along the porta
hepatis and invading the gallbladder. Scattered peritoneal nodules are also seen (arrows in c). (d) Coronal T2-
weighted MR image shows marked low signal intensity in the lesion (arrow) with mild intrahepatic ductal dilatation.
(e–g) Axial nonenhanced (e) and arterial phase (f) and delayed phase (g) contrast-enhanced fat-saturated MR im-
ages show the lesion (arrow in e and f) with absence of early-phase enhancement and with minimal patchy delayed
enhancement (arrow in g). (h) Axial diffusion-weighted image (b = 500 sec/mm2) shows absence of significant restric-
tion of diffusion in the lesion (arrow). (i) Coronal MIP image from MR cholangiopancreatography shows narrowing
of the extrahepatic CBD (arrow) by the process with resulting intrahepatic ductal dilatation. (j) Axial contrast-en-
hanced CT image 16 months after resection shows extensive recurrence in the greater omentum (arrows).

1074

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 19.  AIP. (a) Axial venous phase CT image shows
a rind of hypoattenuating soft tissue (arrow) encasing the
distal body and tail of the pancreas. There is no significant
peripancreatic stranding or fluid. (b) Axial CT image
shows heterogeneous parenchymal enhancement and mild
intrahepatic biliary ductal dilatation (arrow) involving
the left lobe of the liver. (c) T-tube cholangiogram shows
narrowing of the intrapancreatic part of the CBD (arrow)
with mild intrahepatic ductal dilatation. Biliary changes
may be related to direct involvement of the CBD or to
coexisting PSC.

and subcutaneous edema. MR imaging shows
corresponding high-signal-intensity changes with
fluid-sensitive sequences in the affected areas,
while isotope bone scanning may show diffuse
soft-tissue uptake involving the extremities (96).
Imaging findings are nonspecific, and in gen-
eral, imaging does not form a significant part of
the predominantly clinicopathologic diagnostic
criteria for NSF. The only imaging study recom-
mended in the workup of a suspected case is
duplex US to exclude venous stasis caused by
lipodermatosclerosis, one of the entities in the
differential diagnosis of NSF (97).

Differential Diagnosis
Imaging differentials include cellulitis, fasciitis,
scleroderma, cutaneous lymphoma, lymphatic and
venous obstruction, and dermatopolymyositis (96).

Autoimmune Pancreatitis
AIP is a form of chronic pancreatitis character-
ized by diffuse inflammatory infiltration of the
pancreas by IgG4-positive plasma cells and
exuberant fibrosis, leading to eventual organ dys-
function (98). The disease has a male predilection
with a mean age at presentation of 60–65 years.

The presenting symptoms include abdominal dis-
comfort and jaundice; 33% of patients with AIP
have been reported to have symptoms of pancre-
atitis at presentation (99).

Nomenclature
Multiple alternate terms for the condition are
found in the literature. These include primary in-
flammatory sclerosis of the pancreas, chronic sclerosing
pancreatitis, lymphoplasmacytic sclerosing pancreatitis,
nonalcoholic duct-destructive pancreatitis, sclerosing
pancreatocholangitis, idiopathic duct-centric chronic
pancreatitis, idiopathic tumefactive chronic pancreati-
tis, and pancreatic pseudolymphoma (100).

Pathophysiology and Associations
Characteristic lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory
infiltration at histologic analysis, elevated IgG4
levels, frequently positive results on serologic tests,
response to steroids, and association with other

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1075

Figure 20.  AIP in a 62-year-
old man. Axial CT (a), FDG
PET (b), and fused PET/
CT (c) images and coronal
MIP image (d) show intense
uptake in the pancreas.

autoimmune disorders such as Sjögren syndrome
have led to suggestions that AIP is an immune-
mediated fibroinflammatory condition. To reiter-
ate, AIP is one of the most important components
of the recently described group of conditions
called IgG4-related sclerosing disorders, which
can cause extensive multiorgan involvement.

Imaging Findings
Involved areas of the pancreas typically show
hypoechogenicity at US, low attenuation at
CT, and mild hyperintensity at MR imaging.
In the most commonly seen diffuse pattern of
involvement, the pancreas is enlarged and sau-
sage-shaped, with loss of its normal lobulated
contour (Figs 19a, 20a). The pancreas shows
relatively reduced enhancement in the parenchy-
mal phase; delayed enhancement may be noted.
A thin capsule-like rim or peripancreatic halo,
hypoattenuating at CT and hypointense at MR
imaging, may be noted around the body and tail

of the pancreas (Fig 19a) and likely corresponds
to inflammatory tissue.

The focal form of the disease usually shows
the abnormal findings confined typically to the
pancreatic head with evidence of mass effect, es-
pecially upstream dilatation of the main pancreatic
duct. More than one focus of discrete pancreatic
involvement may be seen in the multifocal form of
the disease (98).

Cholangiography shows pancreatic ductal nar-
rowing and irregularities in the involved segments.
Coexisting biliary ductal abnormalities may also
be seen (Fig 19b, 19c), usually related to associ-
ated IgG4-related sclerosing cholangitis (101).

At least partial resolution of the imaging find-

ings may be seen after corticosteroid therapy.
FDG PET has been reported to be useful in diag-
nosis and monitoring of AIP associated with extra-
pancreatic autoimmune diseases (102) (Fig 20).

1076

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 21.  IgG4-related renal disease. Axial contrast-enhanced CT images (a superior to b) show extensive
cortical hypoattenuating lesions bilaterally.

Differential Diagnosis
The most important differential diagnosis for
the diffuse form of the disease is acute pancre-
atitis. Imaging findings favoring a diagnosis of
diffuse AIP over acute pancreatitis include mini-
mal or no peripancreatic stranding, the afore-
mentioned peripancreatic halo, and absence of
peripancreatic fat necrosis (98).

The focal form of the disease may be indis-
tinguishable from pancreatic cancer. Although
presence of associated IgG4-related conditions
and serologic findings may help corroborate a
suspicion of AIP, biopsy is often required for de-
finitive diagnosis.

IgG4-related Sclerosing Disease
As mentioned earlier, ISD is a recently described
assortment of conditions that share the common
histopathologic findings of inflammation with
IgG4-positive cells and proliferative fibrosis.

Nomenclature
The condition was described in 2006, when it
was called hyper-IgG4 disease (103). It has also
been described as IgG4-related systemic disease.

Pathophysiology and Associations
ISD has been proposed as a unifying concept to
bring multiple fibroinflammatory conditions in-
volving various anatomic sites under one umbrella.
The common features of these conditions involve
multiorgan involvement, infiltration of the af-

fected organs by T-lymphocytes and IgG4-positive
plasma cells, and a favorable response to steroids.
The prototype ISD in the abdomen is AIP.
Multiple other conditions that are components
of ISD in the abdomen include RPF, sclerosing
mesenteritis, and sclerosing cholangitis. ISD also
includes sclerosing cholecystitis, sclerosing sialad-
enitis (Küttner tumor), renal disease, interstitial
pneumonia, prostatitis, lymphadenopathy, Riedel
thyroiditis, and IPT (104).

Imaging Findings
and Differential Diagnosis
Most of the important components of ISD in the
abdomen—namely, AIP, sclerosing cholangitis,
RPF, IPT, and sclerosing mesenteritis—have
been described earlier.

Renal involvement with ISD can manifest as
cortical lesions or renal pelvic thickening. Corti-
cal lesions may be nodular or wedge-shaped and
are typically hypoattenuating at CT (Fig 21)
and hypointense at T1- and T2-weighted imag-
ing. They may show mild delayed enhancement;
the main differential diagnoses for this appear-
ance are pyelonephritis, infarcts, and renal me-
tastases. Renal disease may rarely manifest as
a solitary lesion, which may be mistaken for a
neoplasm (98).

Conclusion

Multiple related and unrelated chronic condi-
tions demonstrating progressively infiltrating and
encasing fibrosis may be identified at abdominal
imaging. Clear understanding of their pathophys-

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1077

iology and nomenclature is required for optimal
radiologic interpretation. However, overlapping
imaging findings often result in the need for his-
topathologic assessment for definitive diagnosis
of these conditions.

References
  1. Emory TS, Monihan JM, Carr NJ, Sobin LH.

Sclerosing mesenteritis, mesenteric panniculitis
and mesenteric lipodystrophy: a single entity? Am J
Surg Pathol 1997;21(4):392–398.

  2. Sabaté JM, Torrubia S, Maideu J, Franquet T,

Monill JM, Pérez C. Sclerosing mesenteritis: imag-
ing findings in 17 patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol
1999;172(3):625–629.

17. Sahoo SP, Gangopadhyay AN, Gupta DK, Gopal
SC, Sharma SP, Dash RN. Abdominal cocoon in
children: a report of four cases. J Pediatr Surg 1996;
31(7):987–988.

18. Vijayaraghavan SB, Palanivelu C, Sendhilkumar K,
Parthasarathi R. Abdominal cocoon: sonographic
features. J Ultrasound Med 2003;22(7):719–721.

19. Kawaguchi Y, Kawanishi H, Mujais S, Topley N,
Oreopoulos DG. Encapsulating peritoneal sclero-
sis: definition, etiology, diagnosis, and treatment.
International Society for Peritoneal Dialysis Ad
Hoc Committee on Ultrafiltration Management in
Peritoneal Dialysis. Perit Dial Int 2000;20(suppl 4):
S43–S55.

20. George C, Al-Zwae K, Nair S, Cast JEI. Computed
tomography appearances of sclerosing encapsulat-
ing peritonitis. Clin Radiol 2007;62(8):732–737.

  3. Horton KM, Lawler LP, Fishman EK. CT findings

21. Loughrey GJ, Hawnaur JM, Sambrook P. Case

in sclerosing mesenteritis (panniculitis): spectrum
of disease. RadioGraphics 2003;23(6):1561–1567.

  4. Daskalogiannaki M, Voloudaki A, Prassopoulos
P, et al. CT evaluation of mesenteric panniculi-
tis: prevalence and associated diseases. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 2000;174(2):427–431.

  5. Zissin R, Metser U, Hain D, Even-Sapir E. Mes-

enteric panniculitis in oncologic patients: PET-CT
findings. Br J Radiol 2006;79(937):37–43.
  6. Ti JP, Al-Aradi A, Conlon PJ, Lee MJ, Morrin

MM. Imaging features of encapsulating peritoneal
sclerosis in continuous ambulatory peritoneal
dialysis patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2010;195
(1):W50–W54.

  7. Foo KT, Ng KC, Rauff A, Foong WC, Sinniah R.
Unusual small intestinal obstruction in adolescent
girls: the abdominal cocoon. Br J Surg 1978;65(6):
427–430.

  8. Holland P. Sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis in

chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. Clin Radiol
1990;41(1):19–23.

  9. Demir MK, Akinci O, Onur E, Koksal N. Case

108: sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis. Radiology
2007;242(3):937–939.

10. Dobbie JW. Pathogenesis of peritoneal fibrosing
syndromes (sclerosing peritonitis) in peritoneal
dialysis. Perit Dial Int 1992;12(1):14–27.

11. Lee RG. Sclerosing peritonitis. Dig Dis Sci 1989;34

(9):1473–1476.

12. Rigby RJ, Hawley CM. Sclerosing peritonitis: the
experience in Australia. Nephrol Dial Transplant
1998;13(1):154–159.

13. Stanley MM, Reyes CV, Greenlee HB, Nem-

chausky B, Reinhardt GF. Peritoneal fibrosis in cir-
rhotics treated with peritoneovenous shunting for
ascites: an autopsy study with clinical correlations.
Dig Dis Sci 1996;41(3):571–577.

14. Kaushik R, Punia RPS, Mohan H, Attri AK. Tu-
berculous abdominal cocoon: a report of 6 cases
and review of the literature. World J Emerg Surg
2006;1:18.

15. Ngô Y, Messing B, Marteau P, et al. Peritoneal

sarcoidosis: an unrecognized cause of sclerosing
peritonitis. Dig Dis Sci 1992;37(11):1776–1780.
16. Eltringham WK, Espiner HJ, Windsor CW, et al.

Sclerosing peritonitis due to practolol: a report on
9 cases and their surgical management. Br J Surg
1977;64(4):229–235.

report: computed tomographic appearance of scle-
rosing peritonitis with gross peritoneal calcifica-
tion. Clin Radiol 1997;52(7):557–558.

22. Vitellas KM, Keogan MT, Freed KS, et al. Radio-
logic manifestations of sclerosing cholangitis with
emphasis on MR cholangiopancreatography. Ra-
dioGraphics 2000;20(4):959–975.

23. Tinckler L. Primary sclerosing cholangitis. Post-

grad Med J 1971;47(552):666–670.

24. Abdalian R, Heathcote EJ. Sclerosing cholangitis:
a focus on secondary causes. Hepatology 2006;44
(5):1063–1074.

25. Björnsson E, Olsson R, Bergquist A, et al. The nat-
ural history of small-duct primary sclerosing chol-
angitis. Gastroenterology 2008;134(4):975–980.
26. Hov J-R, Boberg K-M, Karlsen T-H. Autoantibod-
ies in primary sclerosing cholangitis. World J Gas-
troenterol 2008;14(24):3781–3791.

27. Weismüller TJ, Wedemeyer J, Kubicka S, Strassburg

CP, Manns MP. The challenges in primary scleros-
ing cholangitis: aetiopathogenesis, autoimmunity,
management and malignancy. J Hepatol 2008;48
(suppl 1):S38–S57.

28. Ito K, Mitchell DG, Outwater EK, Blasbalg R. Pri-
mary sclerosing cholangitis: MR imaging features.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 1999;172(6):1527–1533.
29. Björnsson E, Lindqvist-Ottosson J, Asztely M,
Olsson R. Dominant strictures in patients with
primary sclerosing cholangitis. Am J Gastroenterol
2004;99(3):502–508.

30. Menias CO, Surabhi VR, Prasad SR, Wang HL,

Narra VR, Chintapalli KN. Mimics of cholangiocar-
cinoma: spectrum of disease. RadioGraphics 2008;
28(4):1115–1129.

31. Cronin CG, Lohan DG, Blake MA, Roche C, Mc-
Carthy P, Murphy JM. Retroperitoneal fibrosis: a
review of clinical features and imaging findings.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 2008;191(2):423–431.
32. Kottra JJ, Dunnick NR. Retroperitoneal fibrosis.
Radiol Clin North Am 1996;34(6):1259–1275.
33. Lepor H, Walsh PC. Idiopathic retroperitoneal fi-

brosis. J Urol 1979;122(1):1–6.

34. Kovács T, Besznyák I, Köves I, Petri K. Ormond’s
disease. Acta Chir Hung 1995-1996;35(3-4):
339–350.

1078

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

35. Pathak LR, Renjhen RC, Chandra CP. Idiopathic
retroperitoneal fibrosis. Postgrad Med J 1971;47
(552):675–678.

36. Dehner LP, Coffin CM. Idiopathic fibrosclerotic
disorders and other inflammatory pseudotumors.
Semin Diagn Pathol 1998;15(2):161–173.
37. Amis ES Jr. Retroperitoneal fibrosis. AJR Am J

Roentgenol 1991;157(2):321–329.

38. Bullock N. Idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis. BMJ

1988;297(6643):240–241.

39. van Bommel EF, Brouwers AJW, Makkus AC, van
Vliet AC. Retroperitoneal fibrosis and p-ANCA-asso-
ciated polyarteritis nodosa: coincidental or common
etiology? Eur J Intern Med 2002;13(6):392–395.

40. Matsuki Y, Sato K, Fujikawa A, Kyoto Y, Hashimoto
H, Hakozaki Y. A case of incidentally detected IgG4-
related sclerosing disease involving inflammatory
abdominal aortic aneurysm and autoimmune pan-
creatitis. Mod Rheumatol 2010;20(3):306–310.
41. Sohn J-H, Byun JH, Yoon SE, et al. Abdominal ex-
trapancreatic lesions associated with autoimmune
pancreatitis: radiological findings and changes after
therapy. Eur J Radiol 2008;67(3):497–507.

42. Stecker JF Jr, Rawls HP, Devine CJ Jr, Devine PC.

Retroperitoneal fibrosis and ergot derivatives. J Urol
1974;112(1):30–32.

43. Uibu T, Oksa P, Auvinen A, et al. Asbestos exposure
as a risk factor for retroperitoneal fibrosis. Lancet
2004;363(9419):1422–1426.

44. Vivas I, Nicolás AI, Velázquez P, Elduayen B,

Fernández-Villa T, Martínez-Cuesta A. Retroperito-
neal fibrosis: typical and atypical manifestations. Br J
Radiol 2000;73(866):214–222.

45. Yuh WT, Barloon TJ, Sickels WJ, Kramolowsky EV,
Williams RD. Magnetic resonance imaging in the
diagnosis and followup of idiopathic retroperito-
neal fibrosis. J Urol 1989;141(3):602–605.

51. Bramm HG, Griffith RP, Griffith TH, Shasteen WJ.
Retroperitoneal fibrosis simulating carcinoma of the
cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1979;53(3 suppl):77S–78S.

52. Murphey MD, Ruble CM, Tyszko SM, Zbojnie-
wicz AM, Potter BK, Miettinen M. Musculoskel-
etal fibromatoses: radiologic-pathologic correlation.
RadioGraphics 2009;29(7):2143–2173.

53. McDonald ES, Yi ES, Wenger DE. Extraabdomi-
nal desmoid-type fibromatosis. RadioGraphics
2008;28(3):901–906.

54. Robbin MR, Murphey MD, Temple HT, Kransdorf
MJ, Choi JJ. Imaging of musculoskeletal fibromato-
sis. RadioGraphics 2001;21(3):585–600.

55. Lee JC, Thomas JM, Phillips S, Fisher C, Mos-
kovic E. Aggressive fibromatosis: MRI features
with pathologic correlation. AJR Am J Roentgenol
2006;186(1):247–254.

56. Rosen RS, Kimball W. Extra-abdominal desmoid

tumor. Radiology 1966;86(3):534–540.

57. Fletcher CDM, Unni KK, Mertens F. Pathology
and genetics of tumours of soft tissue and bone.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization,
2002. http://www.iarc.fr/en/publications/pdfs-online/
pat-gen/bb5/BB5.pdf. Accessed April 4, 2012.
58. Mackenzie DH. The fibromatoses: a clinicopatho-
logical concept. BMJ 1972;4(5835):277–281.
59. Levy AD, Rimola J, Mehrotra AK, Sobin LH. Be-
nign fibrous tumors and tumorlike lesions of the
mesentery: radiologic-pathologic correlation. Ra-
dioGraphics 2006;26(1):245–264.

60. Dinauer PA, Brixey CJ, Moncur JT, Fanburg-Smith
JC, Murphey MD. Pathologic and MR imaging fea-
tures of benign fibrous soft-tissue tumors in adults.
RadioGraphics 2007;27(1):173–187.

61. Okamoto K, Ito J, Sakai K. Cicatricial fibromatosis
mimics metastatic medulloblastoma. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol 1999;20(3):472–473.

46. Feinstein RS, Gatewood OM, Goldman SM, Co-

62. Azizi L, Balu M, Belkacem A, Lewin M, Tubiana

peland B, Walsh PC, Siegelman SS. Computerized
tomography in the diagnosis of retroperitoneal
fibrosis. J Urol 1981;126(2):255–259.

47. Burn PR, Singh S, Barbar S, Boustead G, King

CM. Role of gadolinium-enhanced magnetic reso-
nance imaging in retroperitoneal fibrosis. Can As-
soc Radiol J 2002;53(3):168–170.

48. Arrivé L, Hricak H, Tavares NJ, Miller TR. Malig-
nant versus nonmalignant retroperitoneal fibrosis:
differentiation with MR imaging. Radiology 1989;
172(1):139–143.

49. Degesys GE, Dunnick NR, Silverman PM, Cohan
RH, Illescas FF, Castagno A. Retroperitoneal fi-
brosis: use of CT in distinguishing among possible
causes. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1986;146(1):57–60.
50. Brooks AP, Reznek RH, Webb JA. Aortic displace-
ment on computed tomography of idiopathic retro-
peritoneal fibrosis. Clin Radiol 1989;40(1):51–52.

J-M, Arrivé L. MRI features of mesenteric desmoid
tumors in familial adenomatous polyposis. AJR Am
J Roentgenol 2005;184(4):1128–1135.

63. Lips DJ, Barker N, Clevers H, Hennipman A. The
role of APC and beta-catenin in the aetiology of
aggressive fibromatosis (desmoid tumors). Eur J
Surg Oncol 2009;35(1):3–10.

64. Kawashima A, Goldman SM, Fishman EK, et al.
CT of intraabdominal desmoid tumors: is the tu-
mor different in patients with Gardner’s disease?
AJR Am J Roentgenol 1994;162(2):339–342.
65. Shinagare AB, Ramaiya NH, Jagannathan JP, et al.

A to Z of desmoid tumors. AJR Am J Roentgenol
2011;197(6):W1008–W1014.

66. Casillas J, Sais GJ, Greve JL, Iparraguirre MC, Mo-
rillo G. Imaging of intra- and extraabdominal des-
moid tumors. RadioGraphics 1991;11(6):959–968.
67. Stein L, Elsayes KM, Wagner-Bartak N. Subcutane-
ous abdominal wall masses: radiological reasoning.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 2012;198(2):W146–W151.

RG  •  Volume 33  Number 4

George et al  1079

68. Pretorius ES, Siegelman ES, Ramchandani P, Ban-
ner MP. MR imaging of the penis. RadioGraphics
2001;21(Spec No):S283–S298; discussion S298–
S299.

69. Prando D. New sonographic aspects of Peyronie
disease. J Ultrasound Med 2009;28(2):217–232.
70. Bertolotto M, Pavlica P, Serafini G, Quaia E, Zap-
petti R. Painful penile induration: imaging findings
and management. RadioGraphics 2009;29(2):
477–493.

71. Jalkut M, Gonzalez-Cadavid N, Rajfer J. Peyronie’s
disease: a review. Rev Urol 2003;5(3):142–148.
72. Kirkham APS, Illing RO, Minhas S, Minhas S, Al-

len C. MR imaging of nonmalignant penile lesions.
RadioGraphics 2008;28(3):837–853.

84. Patnana M, Sevrukov AB, Elsayes KM, Viswa-

nathan C, Lubner M, Menias CO. Inflammatory
pseudotumor: the great mimicker. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 2012;198(3):W217–W227.

85. Bisceglia M, Fusilli S, Zaffarano L, Fiorentino F,

Tardio B. Inflammatory pseudotumor of the breast:
report of a case and review of the literature [in Ital-
ian]. Pathologica 1995;87(1):59–64.

86. Gleason BC, Hornick JL. Inflammatory myofibro-
blastic tumours: where are we now? J Clin Pathol
2008;61(4):428–437.

87. Androulaki A, Papathomas TG, Liapis G, et al.

Inflammatory pseudotumor associated with Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis infection. Int J Infect Dis
2008;12(6):607–610.

73. Hauck EW, Hackstein N, Vosshenrich R, et al.

88. Narla LD, Newman B, Spottswood SS, Narla S,

Diagnostic value of magnetic resonance imaging
in Peyronie’s disease: a comparison both with pal-
pation and ultrasound in the evaluation of plaque
formation. Eur Urol 2003;43(3):293–299; discus-
sion 299–300.

74. Bazot M, Salem C, Cortez A, Antoine J-M, Da-

raï E. Imaging of ovarian fibromatosis. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 2003;180(5):1288–1290.

75. Sternberg SS, Mills SE. Sternberg’s diagnostic sur-
gical pathology. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Wil-
liams & Wilkins, 2004.

76. Takeuchi M, Matsuzaki K, Sano N, Furumoto H,
Nishitani H. Ovarian fibromatosis: magnetic reso-
nance imaging findings with pathologic correlation. J
Comput Assist Tomogr 2008;32(5):776–777.
77. Young RH, Scully RE. Fibromatosis and massive

edema of the ovary, possibly related entities: a report
of 14 cases of fibromatosis and 11 cases of massive
edema. Int J Gynecol Pathol 1984;3(2): 153–178.
78. Coakley FV, Anwar M, Poder L, Wang ZJ, Yeh BM,
Joe BN. Magnetic resonance imaging of massive
ovarian edema in pregnancy. J Comput Assist To-
mogr 2010;34(6):865–867.

79. Lee AR, Kim KH, Lee BH, Chin SY. Massive

edema of the ovary: imaging findings. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 1993;161(2):343–344.

80. Spurrell EL, Yeo YC, Rollason TP, Judson IR. A
case of ovarian fibromatosis and massive ovarian
oedema associated with intra-abdominal fibroma-
tosis, sclerosing peritonitis and Meig’s syndrome.
Sarcoma 2004;8(4):113–121.

81. Antoniuk P, Tjandra JJ, Lavery IC. Diffuse intra-

abdominal fibromatosis in association with bilateral
ovarian fibromatosis and oedema. Aust N Z J Surg
1993;63(4):315–318.

82. Roche WR, du Boulay CE. A case of ovarian fibro-

matosis with disseminated intra-abdominal fibro-
matosis. Histopathology 1989;14(1):101–107.
83. Oshiro H, Nomura M, Yamanaka S, Watanabe S,
Inayama Y. Splenic inflammatory pseudotumor
(inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor). J Clin Exp
Hematop 2007;47(2):83–88.

Kolli R. Inflammatory pseudotumor. RadioGraph-
ics 2003;23(3):719–729.

89. Broome DR, Girguis MS, Baron PW, Cottrell

AC, Kjellin I, Kirk GA. Gadodiamide-associated
nephrogenic systemic fibrosis: why radiologists
should be concerned. AJR Am J Roentgenol
2007;188(2):586–592.

90. Cowper SE. Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis.
 ICNSFR Web site. 2001–2009. http://www
.icnsfr.org/. Accessed March 17, 2012.

91. Cowper SE, Robin HS, Steinberg SM, Su LD,
Gupta S, LeBoit PE. Scleromyxoedema-like cu-
taneous diseases in renal-dialysis patients. Lancet
2000;356(9234):1000–1001.

92. Cowper SE. Nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy:
the first 6 years. Curr Opin Rheumatol 2003;15
(6):785–790.

93. Grobner T. Gadolinium: a specific trigger for the

development of nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy
and nephrogenic systemic fibrosis? Nephrol Dial
Transplant 2006;21(4):1104–1108.

94. High WA, Ayers RA, Chandler J, Zito G, Cowper
SE. Gadolinium is detectable within the tissue of
patients with nephrogenic systemic fibrosis. J Am
Acad Dermatol 2007;56(1):21–26.

95. ACR manual on contrast media, version 7. http://
www.acr.org/SecondaryMainMenuCategories/
quality_safety/contrast_manual/NephrogenicSys-
temicFibrosis.aspx. Accessed March 16, 2012.
96. Morris MF, Zhang Y, Zhang H, et al. Features of

nephrogenic systemic fibrosis on radiology examina-
tions. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2009;193(1):61–69.
97. Girardi M, Kay J, Elston DM, Leboit PE, Abu-

Alfa A, Cowper SE. Nephrogenic systemic fibro-
sis: clinicopathological definition and workup
recommendations. J Am Acad Dermatol 2011;65
(6):1095–1106, e7.

1080

July-August 2013

radiographics.rsna.org

98.  Vlachou PA, Khalili K, Jang H-J, Fischer S,

101.  Sahani DV, Kalva SP, Farrell J, et al. Autoim-

Hirschfield GM, Kim TK. IgG4-related scleros-
ing disease: autoimmune pancreatitis and extra-
pancreatic manifestations. RadioGraphics 2011;
31(5):1379–1402.

99.  Sah RP, Pannala R, Chari ST, et al. Prevalence,
diagnosis, and profile of autoimmune pancreati-
tis presenting with features of acute or chronic
pancreatitis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2010;8
(1):91–96.

100.  Lara LP, Chari ST. Autoimmune pancreatitis.

Curr Gastroenterol Rep 2005;7(2):101–106.

mune pancreatitis: imaging features. Radiology
2004;233(2):345–352.

102.  Nakajo M, Jinnouchi S, Noguchi M, et al. FDG

PET and PET/CT monitoring of autoimmune
pancreatitis associated with extrapancreatic
autoimmune disease. Clin Nucl Med 2007;32
(4):282–285.

103.  Neild GH, Rodriguez-Justo M, Wall C, Connolly
JO. Hyper-IgG4 disease: report and characterisa-
tion of a new disease. BMC Med 2006;4:23.
104.  Kamisawa T, Okamoto A. IgG4-related scleros-
ing disease. World J Gastroenterol 2008;14(25):
3948–3955.

This journal-based SA-CME activity has been approved for AMA PRA Category 1 CreditTM. See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

Teaching Points

July-August Issue 2013

Chronic Fibrosing Conditions in Abdominal Imaging

Verghese George, MBBS, FRCR • Varaha Sairam Tammisetti, MD • Venkateswar Rao Surabhi, MD • Alampady
K. Shanbhogue, MD

RadioGraphics 2013; 33:1053–1080 • Published online 10.1148/rg.334125081 • Content Codes:

Page 1054
IgG4-related sclerosing disease, also known as hyper-IgG4 disease, is a recently described constellation of
conditions that share the common histopathologic findings of lymphoplasmacytic inflammation with IgG4-
positive cells and marked fibrosis.

Page 1055
Sclerosing mesenteritis is categorized into three subtypes—mesenteric panniculitis, mesenteric lipo-
dystrophy, and retractile mesenteritis—on the basis of the predominant histopathologic finding in the
affected mesentery.

Page 1059
PSC is diagnosed in patients who have clinical and biochemical features of cholestasis and typical
cholangiographic findings at imaging, in whom secondary causes of sclerosing cholangitis have been
excluded.

Page 1063
As with malignant RPF, metastatic retroperitoneal adenopathy typically elevates the aorta off the under-
lying vertebral body, although exceptions to this guideline have been reported.

Page 1069
Ovarian fibromatosis is characterized by proliferation of collagen-producing spindle cells surrounding
normal ovarian structures, with collagenous thickening of the superficial cortex. Despite these changes,
there is partial preservation of normal ovarian structures within the fibrous mass, a feature that has been
reported to allow differentiation of ovarian fibromatosis from similar conditions.

