M
U
L
T
I
S
Y
S
T
E
M
R
A
D
O
L
O
G
Y

I

Note:  This copy is for your personal non-commercial use only. To order presentation-ready
copies for distribution to your colleagues or clients, contact us at www.rsna.org/rsnarights.

Imaging of Actinomycosis in
Various Organs: A Comprehensive
Review1

19

Actinomycosis is a chronic suppurative bacterial infection caused
by Actinomyces species. Actinomyces israelii is the organism most
commonly found in human disease. Actinomycosis usually mani-
fests with abscess formation, dense fibrosis, and draining sinuses.
The disease is further characterized by the tendency to extensively
spread beyond normal fascial and connective tissue planes. Ac-
tinomycosis occurs most commonly in the cervicofacial region
(50%–65%), followed by the thoracic (15%–30%) and abdomi-
nopelvic (20%) regions, but rarely involves the central nervous
system. Most cases of cervicofacial actinomycosis are odontogenic
in origin. In the acute form, cervicofacial disease can manifest with
soft-tissue swelling, a painful pyogenic abscess, or a mass lesion. In
the subacute to chronic form, a painless indurated mass can spread
to the skin, leading to draining sinus tracts. Thoracic manifestations
include parenchymal, bronchiectatic, and endobronchial actinomy-
cosis. At computed tomography, pulmonary actinomycosis usually
appears as chronic segmental airspace consolidation containing ne-
crotic low-attenuation areas with peripheral enhancement. Abdomi-
nopelvic actinomycosis preferentially involves the ileocecal region,
ovary, and fallopian tube. The imaging findings favoring abdomi-
nopelvic actinomycosis include strong enhancement in the solid
portion of the mass after contrast material administration, small
rim-enhancing abscesses within the mass, and extensive inflamma-
tory extensions. Actinomycosis in the central nervous system may
produce brain abscess, meningitis, subdural empyema, actinomyce-
toma, and spinal and cranial epidural abscess. In general, actinomy-
cosis responds well to antibiotic therapy, but long-term follow-up
after treatment is needed because of frequent relapses.

©RSNA, 2014 • radiographics.rsna.org

Suk Hee Heo, MD
Sang Soo Shin, MD
Jin Woong Kim, MD
Hyo Soon Lim, MD
Hyun Ju Seon, MD
Sook-In Jung, MD
Yong Yeon Jeong, MD
Heoung Keun Kang, MD

RadioGraphics 2014; 34:19–33

Published online 10.1148/rg.341135077

Content Code:

1From the Department of Radiology, Chonnam
National  University  Hwasun  Hospital,  Chon-
nam  National  University  Medical  School,  Jeol-
lanam-do,  Republic  of  Korea  (S.H.H.,  J.W.K.,
H.S.L., H.J.S., Y.Y.J., H.K.K.); and the Depart-
ments of Radiology (S.S.S.) and Internal Medi-
cine  (S.I.J.)  and  the  Center  for Aging  and  Ge-
riatrics  (S.S.S.),  Chonnam  National  University
Hospital,  Chonnam  National  University  Medi-
cal  School,  8  Hack-dong,  Dong-gu,  Gwang-ju
501-757, Republic of Korea. Presented as an ed-
ucation exhibit at the 2012 RSNA Annual Meet-
ing. Received April 29, 2013; revision requested
July 3 and received July 16; accepted July 23. For
this journal-based SA-CME activity, the authors,
editor, and reviewers have no financial relation-
ships to disclose. Address correspondence to
S.S.S. (e-mail: kjradsss@dreamwiz.com).

ONLINE-ONLY SA-CME
LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After completing this journal-based SA-
CME activity, participants will be able to:
 ■ Describe the microbiology, pathogene-
sis, pathology, and clinical manifestations
of actinomycosis.

 ■ Recognize various imaging features of
actinomycosis according to the involve-
ment sites.

 ■ Discuss treatment strategy and progno-
sis for patients with actinomycosis.

See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

20

January-February 2014

radiographics.rsna.org

Introduction
Actinomycosis is a chronic suppurative disease
caused by Actinomyces species, which are mem-
bers of the endogenous flora normally encoun-
tered in the mouth, gastrointestinal tract, and
female genital tract (1). Actinomycosis usually
manifests with several features, such as abscess
formation, dense fibrosis, and draining sinuses
(2). The clinical and radiologic findings of
actinomycosis are variable, depending on the
primary site of involvement and the duration of
the disease. Indeed, it can frequently resemble
other inflammatory and neoplastic lesions, so
actinomycosis raises a diagnostic challenge,
especially when the clinical symptoms are not
typical. Therefore, an understanding of the vari-
ous imaging findings of actinomycosis grouped
by the sites of involvement is necessary for early
diagnosis and initial proper antibiotic therapy,
to prevent extensive local tissue destruction and
minimize unnecessary surgery.

Among several pathogenic Actinomyces species

in humans, Actinomyces israelii is the most com-
mon causative agent of actinomycosis (1). The
organism is usually unable to cross the mucosal
barrier. However, individuals with poor orodental
hygiene, those with prolonged use of intrauter-
ine devices, and those receiving bisphosphonate
therapy are at high risk of actinomycosis (1).

Actinomycotic infection should be a diagnos-
tic consideration in the following three clinical
circumstances: (a) a series of manifestations in-
cluding chronicity, extensive propagation across
tissue planes, and firm to hard masslike features,
which are frequently confused with malignant
disease; (b) drainage of an abscess by a sinus
tract, which may spontaneously close and re-
form elsewhere; and (c) temporary improvement
after a short course of antibiotic treatment, fol-
lowed by frequent relapses (1). The multiorgan
involvement of actinomycosis can be effectively
classified as cervicofacial, thoracic, abdomino-
pelvic, and central nervous system disease (1).
The frequency of occurrence of actinomycosis
according to the sites of potential involvement is
shown in the Table (1–8).

The purpose of this article is to familiarize ra-

diologists with the clinical and radiologic char-
acteristics of actinomycosis. First, the microbiol-
ogy of actinomycosis and its pathogenesis and
histopathology are reviewed. Then the clinical
manifestations are described, with illustrations
of a wide spectrum of radiologic findings in pa-
tients with actinomycosis involving the head and
neck, the thorax, the abdomen and pelvis, and
the central nervous system. Finally, the treat-
ment strategy and the prognosis of actinomyco-
sis are described.

Frequency of Occurrence of Actinomy-
cosis by Site of Potential Involvement

Site

Prevalence (%)

Cervicofacial
Thoracic
Abdominopelvic
Central nervous

system

Musculoskeletal
Disseminated

Sources.—References 1–8.

50–65
15–30
20
2–3

Rare
Rare

Microbiology

The causative agents of actinomycosis are
gram-positive non–spore-forming anaerobic or
microaerophilic bacterial species (2) with a ten-
dency to produce branching filaments that usu-
ally fragment into longer or shorter rods, with
or without branching (9). Actinomyces species
were once thought to be fungi because of their
branching filaments. However, these species are
pleomorphic and branching filamentous bacteria
that are currently classified in the genus Actino-
myces of the order Actinomycetales (2). The ge-
nus Actinomyces has been expanded considerably
in recent years (10). Although several Actino-
myces species could be pathogenic in humans—
including Actinomyces naeslundii, Actinomyces
odontolyticus, Actinomyces viscosus, Actinomyces
meyeri, and Actinomyces gerencseriae (1)—actino-
mycosis is most commonly caused by A israelii
(1). Although the definite diagnosis is made by
microbiologic identification of one of the organ-
isms of actinomycosis from a sterile site, the iso-
lation of Actinomyces species is usually achieved
in fewer than 50% of cases (3,11). Because most
actinomycotic infections are polymicrobial in
nature (9,12), a variety of other microorganisms
are frequently found at infection sites in addi-
tion to Actinomyces species.

Pathogenesis and Histopathology
In the pathogenesis of actinomycosis, disruption
of the mucosal barrier plays a central role (1).
Thus, this disease usually follows conditions that
may allow bacterial entry into deep tissues across
the mucosal barrier, such as trauma, surgery, or
foreign bodies. Typically, a densely fibrotic lesion is
one of the features of actinomycosis, which tends
to extensively spread beyond fascial and connec-
tive tissue planes (1). As the lesion progresses, it
is accompanied by abscess formation centrally,
which eventually leads to sinus tracts extending
from the abscess to the skin or adjacent organs (1).

RG  •  Volume 34  Number 1

Heo et al  21

Figure 1.  Sulfur granules in the surgical specimen obtained from a 50-year-old woman. (a) Photomicrograph (origi-
nal magnification, ×100; hematoxylin-eosin stain) shows sulfur granules (*) that are round, oval, or horseshoe-shaped
basophilic masses with a radiating fringe of eosinophilic clubs. (b) Photomicrograph (original magnification, ×400; Go-
mori methenamine-silver stain) depicts filamentous bacteria (arrows) in a sulfur granule (*).

comprised of bacterial elements and tissue debris
(4). With hematoxylin-eosin staining, sulfur gran-
ules are seen as round, oval, or horseshoe-shaped
basophilic masses with a radiating fringe of eosin-
ophilic clubs (Fig 1a). Given that sulfur granules
may occur in infectious diseases other than acti-
nomycosis, such as nocardiosis and eumycetoma
(2), special stains such as Gomori methenamine-
silver stain may be needed to show that the sulfur
granules are composed of branching bacteria and
not fungi, cocci, or bacilli (Fig 1b) (1).

Clinical Manifestations

Cervicofacial Disease
Actinomycosis most commonly involves the cer-
vicofacial region, which represents more than
50% of cases (3). Most cervicofacial Actinomyces
infections are odontogenic in origin and develop
mainly in individuals with intact immune systems
(5). The risk factors for cervicofacial infections
include poor dental hygiene, recent dental ex-
traction, dental caries, oromaxillofacial trauma,
chronic tonsillitis, otitis, and mastoiditis (2,6).
In addition, osteonecrosis caused by radiation
therapy or by bisphosphonate therapy has been
recently associated with actinomycotic infection
of the mandible and maxilla (13). The most com-
monly involved site is the angle of the jaw or the
submandibular region, followed by the cheek, the
submental space, the masticator space, and the
temporomandibular joint (1).

In the acute form, cervicofacial disease can
manifest with soft-tissue swelling, a painful pyo-
genic abscess, or a mass lesion (Fig 2). In the sub-
acute to chronic form, a painless indurated mass
can spread to the skin and is often accompanied

Figure 2.  Acute cervicofacial actinomycosis in a
63-year-old man. Axial contrast material–enhanced
computed tomographic (CT) image shows a peripheral
ring-enhancing lesion (arrows) with central suppura-
tive necrosis in the right submandibular space.

From a diagnostic perspective, actinomycosis

is further characterized by the histopathologic
finding of “sulfur granules.” The presence of
these sulfur granules in pus from the abscess, in
exudates from a sinus tract, or in a tissue speci-
men is the single most helpful histopathologic
finding in making a definite diagnosis of actino-
mycosis. The sulfur granules, which are named
for their yellow color, represent tangled filaments
of Actinomyces species (2). Those granules are

22

January-February 2014

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 3.  Chronic cervicofacial actinomycosis with a draining sinus tract in a 73-year-old woman. (a) Axial
contrast-enhanced CT image shows an elliptical mass with a focal skin defect (arrow), which corresponds to
the cutaneous fistula. (b) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image (bone window) depicts focal sclerotic change
(arrowheads) in the adjacent mandible, a finding suggestive of osteomyelitis.

by draining sinus tracts (Fig 3) (2). Although
actinomycotic infection can be associated with
osteomyelitis in the adjacent mandible or maxilla,
this association is not commonly observed (14).
In some cases, an actinomycotic lesion is seen
as a mass with relatively homogeneous enhance-
ment that has small necrotic areas or cystic por-
tions (Fig 4). This pattern of enhancement might
be attributed to the abundant granulation tissue
and intense fibrosis (15). Maxillary involvement
occurs less frequently; with this type of involve-
ment, a soft-tissue lesion associated with osteo-
myelitis and cutaneous or maxillary sinus fistulas
can be observed (Fig 5).

Actinomycosis tends to spread into the adjacent
neck space, ignoring normal fascial planes (Fig 6)
(1,6,15). This infiltrative nature may be explained
by the action of the proteolytic enzymes of the or-
ganism (16). Because Actinomyces species usually
do not spread lymphatically as a result of the size
of the organism, actinomycosis is rarely associated
with regional lymphadenopathy (6,15,17). Thus,
in distinguishing actinomycosis from a malignancy,
the diagnosis of actinomycosis should be consid-
ered if a highly infiltrative contrast material–en-
hanced mass is seen that is accompanied by no or
a few reactive regional lymph nodes.

Figure 4.  Cervicofacial actinomycosis in a 49-year-old
woman. Coronal contrast-enhanced CT image shows a
strongly enhanced mass (arrows) in the left submandib-
ular gland. Several small nonenhanced areas are noted
within the mass, findings suggestive of small abscesses.
Soft-tissue infiltration to the adjacent fat plane and fas-
cial thickening (arrowheads) are also depicted.

Thoracic Disease
Actinomyces species may cause bronchopulmo-
nary infection, as well as pleural, chest wall, or
mediastinal involvement; and the thoracic form

of the disease accounts for 15%–30% of the
cases of actinomycosis (12,18). Thoracic actino-
mycosis is believed to spread into the thoracic
organs mainly through aspiration of organisms

RG  •  Volume 34  Number 1

Heo et al  23

Figure 5.  Actinomycosis involving the maxilla in a 75-year-old woman. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image
shows an ill-defined and poorly enhanced lesion (*) with air bubbles and adjacent soft-tissue thickening (arrows)
in the right maxilla and maxillary sinus. (b) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image (bone window) shows irregular
bone destruction and diffuse sclerotic change (arrows), findings that indicate chronic osteomyelitis.

or, rarely, (c) hematogenous spread to the lung
(2). Thoracic infection may occur more fre-
quently in patients with underlying pulmonary
disease, such as emphysema, chronic bronchitis,
or bronchiectasis, and those with previous lung
damage (20).

Pulmonary actinomycotic infection usually
manifests with a mass or pneumonia (1), which
predominantly affects the lower lobes (21). At
CT, pulmonary actinomycotic infection usually
appears as chronic segmental airspace consoli-
dation containing necrotic low-attenuation areas
with peripheral enhancement, often accom-
panied by adjacent pleural thickening (Fig 7)
(19,22). Parenchymal actinomycosis is associ-
ated with pleural involvement, that is, pleural
thickening, effusion, or empyema, in more than
50% of cases (1). Multiple small cavities may
develop within the parenchymal lesion (Fig 8).
In addition to parenchymal actinomycosis, other
forms of pulmonary actinomycosis have been
reported.

Given that Actinomyces species tend to in-
vade devitalized tissue (23), it is not surprising
that patients with parenchymal destruction and
bronchiectasis caused by prior tuberculosis or
other infections are predisposed to secondary
actinomycotic infection. In general, CT findings
of the bronchiectatic form of actinomycosis in-
clude localized areas of bronchiectasis, irregular
bronchial wall thickening, and irregular peri-
bronchial consolidation with or without necrotic
foci (Fig 9) (22). Parenchymal actinomycosis

Figure 6.  Cervicofacial actinomycosis in a 53-year-
old woman. Axial contrast-enhanced CT image shows
a homogeneous and strongly enhanced mass (*) with-
out a necrotic or cystic portion in the right subman-
dibular space. Regional reactive lymph nodes (arrows)
and inflammatory spread to the skin (arrowheads) are
also depicted.

from the oropharynx (19). However, the tho-
racic form of the disease could also result from
(a) direct extension into the mediastinum from
cervicofacial infection, (b) transdiaphragmatic
or retroperitoneal spread from the abdomen,

24

January-February 2014

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 7.  Thoracic actinomycosis involving
the lung parenchyma in a 49-year-old man.
(a) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image shows
a masslike consolidation in the left lower lobe.
Note the areas of low attenuation (arrows)
within the contrast-enhanced mass and the ad-
jacent pleural thickening (arrowhead). (b) Axial
contrast-enhanced CT image (lung window)
obtained at the same level as a shows a poorly
defined subpleural mass. (c) Photograph of the
gross pathologic specimen obtained at lobec-
tomy of the left lower lobe shows a yellowish
mass (arrows) with necrotic foci (arrowheads).
Each scale division is 0.5 cm.

may be accompanied by concomitant occur-
rence of the bronchiectatic form (20).

In rare cases, endobronchial actinomycosis can
occur, likely resulting from secondary infection of
a preexisting broncholith by aspirated Actinomyces
species (Fig 10) (7,24). Inflammatory processes
may further aggravate the endobronchial lesion,
resulting in progressive obstruction of the airway
with distal obstructive pneumonic consolidation.
In most cases of the endobronchial form of acti-
nomycosis, a calcified endobronchial nodule, that
is, a broncholith, was reported to be caused by a
previous tuberculous infection (7). Thus, when a
central endobronchial calcified nodule (broncho-
lith) associated with distal postobstructive pneu-
monia is depicted at CT in a region with endemic
tuberculosis, the differential diagnosis needs to
include endobronchial actinomycosis.

Pulmonary actinomycosis may extend to the

mediastinum and chest wall across anatomic
barriers, such as fissures and pleura. However,
mediastinal actinomycosis is known to be ex-
tremely rare (1).

Abdominopelvic Disease
On average, about 20% of the patients with acti-
nomycosis present with the abdominopelvic form

of the disease (25). Abdominal actinomycosis usu-
ally occurs after the disruption of the intestinal
mucosal integrity caused by appendicitis, colonic
diverticulitis, penetrating trauma, or surgery of
the gut (26). However, on occasion, the inciting
conditions may not be identified. Abdominal ac-
tinomycosis can remain undetected for months to
years owing to its indolent nature and nonspecific
symptoms (2). Actinomycotic infection preferen-
tially involves the ileocecal region of the bowel and
extends to surrounding structures across fascial
and connective tissue planes (Fig 11). As noted,
the aggressive nature of the infiltration is the tell-
tale clue for actinomycosis (16,27,28).

In abdominal actinomycosis, the bowel is pre-
sumed to be secondarily affected, as evidenced by

RG  •  Volume 34  Number 1

Heo et al  25

Figure 8.  Parenchymal actinomycosis mani-
festing as a cavitary mass in a 46-year-old man.
(a) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image shows
an irregular and cavitary nodular consolidation
containing a low-attenuation area in the right
lower lobe. (b) Axial contrast-enhanced CT
image (lung window) obtained at the same level
as a shows that this mass is surrounded by ar-
eas of ground-glass attenuation. Smooth pleu-
ral tags are shown. (c) Axial contrast-enhanced
CT image obtained at follow-up 10 months
after the start of antibiotic therapy shows com-
plete resolution of the cavitary consolidation,
with residual cystic bronchiectasis.

abdominal actinomycosis (27,29). Although the
pathogenesis is not well understood, a strongly
enhanced omental mass may originate from the
extension of pelvic or supramesocolic infection,
rather than from perforation of the bowel (Fig
13) (27). Interestingly, despite the unrestricted
infiltrative nature of abdominal actinomycosis, it is
unlikely to spread into the entire peritoneal cavity.
Ascites is usually minimal or absent.

Pelvic actinomycosis is closely associated with
the prolonged use of intrauterine devices, usually
for more than 2 years (Fig 14) (4,8). The pelvic
form of the disease may even occur months or
years after the removal of an intrauterine device
(30). Pelvic actinomycosis may also result from
extension of abdominal actinomycosis, in which
the source of infection is usually latent ileocecal
disease (2). In pelvic actinomycosis, the ovary
and fallopian tube are most commonly affected.
The imaging findings suggestive of tubo-ovar-

ian actinomycosis include strong enhancement
in the solid portion of the mass after contrast

a report that mucosal changes were minimal or
absent at colonoscopy (27). In cases of actinomy-
cotic disease involving the bowel, the common CT
finding is concentric wall thickening, accompanied
by a cystic or solid mass in the vicinity of the af-
fected bowel segment (Fig 12) (27). This mass
is characteristically surrounded by prominent
inflammatory infiltrations. Because of the pres-
ence of extensive and dense fibrosis, a hallmark of
actinomycosis, solid portions of the mass and the
surrounding soft-tissue strands around the mass
tend to show strong enhancement after contrast
material administration. The invasive nature of
the mass often is suggestive of a tumor. However,
regional lymphadenopathy is rarely associated with

26

January-February 2014

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 9.  Pulmonary actinomycosis associated with bronchiectasis in a 59-year-old man. Sagittal contrast-enhanced
reformatted CT images obtained with mediastinal window settings (a) and lung window settings (b) show tubular
bronchiectasis with peribronchial consolidation and adhesive atelectasis in the right middle lobe.

Figure 10.  Endobronchial actinomycosis as-
sociated with broncholithiasis in a 41-year-old
woman. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image
shows a calcified endobronchial nodule (arrow)
obstructing the lumen of the right middle lobar
bronchus. Note the surrounding low-attenuation
area around the broncholith, a finding suggestive
of necrotic material. (b) Axial contrast-enhanced
CT image obtained at a lower level than a shows
distal segmental atelectasis containing a fluid-
filled bronchus and a calcified nodule (arrow) in
the right middle lobe. (c) Bronchoscopic image
shows yellowish broncholiths with surround-
ing hemorrhage in the right middle lobar
bronchus.

RG  •  Volume 34  Number 1

Heo et al  27

Figure 11.  Abdominal actinomycosis involving the cecum in a 64-year-old woman. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced
CT image shows focal wall thickening of the cecum (arrows) and also a heterogeneously enhancing necrotizing mass
(*) with internal air bubbles in the retrocecal area. (b) Coronal contrast-enhanced reformatted CT image shows
thickening of the retroperitoneal septa and fascia (arrows) around the necrotizing mass (*).

Figure 12.  Abdominal actinomycosis involving the
transverse colon in a 52-year-old woman. (a) Axial
contrast-enhanced CT image shows concentric wall thick-
ening and enhancement of the transverse colon (arrows)
with adjacent inflammatory infiltration in the greater
omentum. (b) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image ob-
tained at a lower level than a shows a strongly enhanced
ill-defined solid mass (M) with surrounding fat strand-
ing in the greater omentum. (c) Photograph of the gross
pathologic specimen shows a yellowish mass (M) con-
taining whitish fibrotic bands (arrows). Focal ulceration
(arrowhead) is also seen in the transverse colon (C). Each
scale division is 0.5 cm.

28

January-February 2014

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 13.  Abdominal actinomycosis with extension to the anterior abdominal wall in a 46-year-old man. (a) Coro-
nal contrast-enhanced reformatted CT image shows a strongly enhanced solid mass (arrows) in the greater omentum.
(b) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image shows that the mass extends to the adjacent anterior abdominal wall (arrows).
(c) Photograph of the gross pathologic specimen shows an ill-defined mass (arrows) containing rich whitish fibrosis in
the omentum. Each scale division is 0.5 cm.

Figure 14.  Pelvic actinomycosis involving the adnexa and uterus in a 68-year-old woman. (a) Axial contrast-
enhanced CT image shows a mixed solid and cystic mass (arrows) in the right adnexa. U = uterus. (b) Axial
contrast-enhanced CT image obtained at a lower level than a shows diffuse enlargement of the uterus (U) with
small abscesses (white arrows). Note the perirectal soft-tissue infiltrations (black arrows) and the intrauterine de-
vice (arrowhead).

material administration, small rim-enhancing
abscesses within the mass, and extensive inflam-
matory extensions (Fig 15) (31). At CT and MR
imaging, tubo-ovarian actinomycosis usually ap-
pears to be more solid than the usual tubo-ovarian
abscess in the adnexal region (31). Owing to the
presence of prominent fibrotic tissue, the inflam-
matory strandings and the solid component of the

mass tend to demonstrate intermediate to low sig-
nal intensity on T2-weighted MR images (31).
Pelvic actinomycosis can also spread exten-
sively to the uterus, urinary bladder, rectal area,
urachus, abdominal wall, and peritoneum (Fig
16) (18,32,33). As pelvic actinomycosis pro-
gresses, it can result in a frozen pelvis, resembling
pelvic malignancy or endometriosis (1,4).

RG  •  Volume 34  Number 1

Heo et al  29

Figure 15.  Tubo-ovarian actinomycosis in a 41-year-
old woman. (a) Axial T2-weighted magnetic resonance
(MR) image shows a mixed cystic and solid mass (*)
in the left adnexa, with marked surrounding inflamma-
tory infiltrations (arrows). (b) Axial contrast-enhanced
T1-weighted MR image shows avid enhancement of the
surrounding inflammatory infiltrations (arrows), as well
as a solid portion in the mass (*). (c) Photograph of the
gross pathologic specimen shows a hard yellow to light
gray mass (arrows) with necrosis (*) in the left adnexa.

Figure 16.  Pelvic actinomycosis involving the urinary bladder and urachus in a 39-year-old woman. (a) Sagittal con-
trast-enhanced reformatted CT image shows wall thickening of the urinary bladder associated with a strongly enhanced
lesion (arrows) extending from the dome of the bladder to the umbilicus. (b) Axial contrast-enhanced CT image shows
marked inflammatory fat stranding (arrows) in the anterior pelvic cavity, as well as an intrauterine device (arrowhead).

Central Nervous System Disease
Actinomycosis rarely involves the central ner-
vous system, with infection of this site occurring
in about 2%–3% of actinomycotic infections
(34,35). Involvement of the central nervous sys-

tem usually results from hematogenous spread
from a distant primary site such as the oral cav-
ity, lung, abdomen, or pelvis (36). However, di-
rect extension from foci of infection in the face,
jaw, ears, or paranasal sinuses can occur by way

30

January-February 2014

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 17.  Actinomycotic cerebral abscess in a
39-year-old woman. (a) Axial T2-weighted MR im-
age shows a cystic mass (arrows) with a thick low-
signal-intensity rim and perilesional edema in the
left frontal lobe. (b) Axial T1-weighted MR image
obtained after administration of gadolinium-based
contrast material shows eccentric and thick rim en-
hancement of the mass (arrow). (c) Axial diffusion-
weighted MR image shows the central portion of
the mass with restricted diffusion and a rim without
diffusion restriction at the margin of the mass (ar-
rows), findings that correspond to the nonenhanced
central portion and the rim-enhancing peripheral
portion of the mass, respectively, in b.

of connective tissue planes or foramina at the
skull base (35). Although the signs and symp-
toms mimic those of pyogenic infection, the
symptoms are usually mild and indolent; and in
turn, the duration of symptoms before diagnosis
is typically longer than that for pyogenic brain
abscess (2,36,37). Actinomycotic brain infection
manifests with fever in fewer than 50% of cases
(2). Further, there may be little evidence to im-
ply an infectious disease. This is why an initial
diagnosis of a neoplasm is frequently made.

Although brain abscess is reported to be the

most common type of central nervous system
manifestation of actinomycosis, accounting for
about 75% of all central nervous system involve-
ment, actinomycosis may also manifest in the
central nervous system as meningitis, subdural

empyema, actinomycetoma, and spinal and cra-
nial epidural abscess (2). Actinomycotic brain
abscess is usually single and involves the tem-
poral and frontal lobes (2). The imaging find-
ings include a nonenhanced central portion that
represents pus, an enhancing thick wall that may
be irregular or nodular, and perilesional edema
(Fig 17) (36). These findings also may be noted
in other causes of brain abscess and malignancy.
However, in contrast with cystic brain tumors,
the core of the abscess is depicted as an area
with restricted diffusion and the peripheral wall
is depicted as an area without diffusion restric-
tion at diffusion-weighted imaging (37,38).
Meningeal involvement with actinomycosis may
result in chronic meningitis, which is easily con-
fused with tuberculous meningitis (2) because

RG  •  Volume 34  Number 1

Heo et al  31

Figure 18.  Cerebral actinomycetoma in a 69-year-old woman. (a) Axial T2-weighted MR image
shows multiple round or oval hyperintense nodular lesions in the periventricular and subcortical white
matter. (b) Axial gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MR image depicts nodular or rim enhancement
of the lesions.

of the similar findings in the cerebrospinal fluid
(normal or low glucose level, elevated protein
level, mononuclear pleocytosis, and negative
culture).

Less commonly, actinomycotic infection may

manifest as actinomycetomas or actinomycotic
granuloma, in which the fibrotic component
predominates (Fig 18) (39). Actinomycetomas
may form solid nodular or granulomatous mass
lesions, which may be found at various sites
within the central nervous system. In these
cases, actinomycosis is hard to suspect until
there is histopathologic confirmation from the
surgical specimen.

Treatment and Prognosis
Penicillin G is the drug of choice regardless of
the severity and site of actinomycosis (1,2,18).
Although therapy needs to be individually tai-
lored, mild forms of the disease, particularly
in the cervicofacial region, can be adequately
treated with a 2-month course of an oral anti-
microbial regimen without the need for surgi-
cal resection (2). In contrast, for more severe
and complicated cases, combined medical and
surgical treatment may be required, with a high
dosage of antibiotics for a prolonged period.
Although surgical intervention can be effectively
performed in a bid to remove necrotic tissue,
sinus tracts, abscess cavities, and infected bone,
the surgery itself is often not curative without

the aid of antimicrobial treatment (2). In any
case, it is of utmost importance to treat this
disease for a prolonged period of time because
of the poor penetration of antibiotics into the
fibrotic tissues (40). According to the findings
from recent studies, however, the use of the tra-
ditional intensive long-term antibiotic regimen
has been questioned (41,42). Given that most
actinomycotic infections are polymicrobial in
nature, it is still debatable whether antibiotic
therapy needs to be directed against secondary
organisms that are frequently isolated along with
Actinomyces species (1,2,18).

In general, actinomycosis shows an excellent

prognosis with a low mortality if early diagno-
sis is made and proper treatment is given (43).
However, long-term observation and follow-up
after treatments are required because relapse
is common. Although disseminated disease is
uncommon, it could be fatal, even if correctly
diagnosed and treated (11). In central nervous
system actinomycosis, Smego (35) noted sev-
eral risk factors for a poor prognosis, including
the onset of disease more than 2 months before
presentation, a lack of antibiotic treatment or
surgery, and the performance of percutaneous
drainage instead of surgical resection. Com-
pared with those who have the cervicofacial,
abdominal, and pelvic forms of the disease, pa-
tients with pulmonary actinomycosis may have
a much worse prognosis (2,12). This might be

32

January-February 2014

radiographics.rsna.org

partly attributable to the fact that in cases with
actinomycotic bacteremia, the lungs were recog-
nized as the initial focus of infection (11,12).

Conclusions

Actinomycosis has always been a diagnostic
conundrum. In the absence of a classic clinical
scenario including cutaneous sinus tracts and
frequent relapses after a short course of medical
therapy, this unique infection is easily confused
with malignant disease or chronic granuloma-
tous disease such as tuberculosis or fungal infec-
tion. Although actinomycosis tends to show no
specific radiologic findings, as well as indolent
and nonspecific symptoms, some imaging fea-
tures appear to be helpful for the diagnosis of
actinomycosis. These features include a highly
infiltrative nature, strong enhancement after
contrast material administration, and suppura-
tive necrosis within the mass. Given that acti-
nomycosis can be cured with antibiotic therapy
alone, it is axiomatic that the timely detection
of actinomycotic infection offers the greatest
chance for cure without unnecessary surgery.
Thus, every radiologist should be familiar with
the various clinical and radiologic characteristics
of actinomycosis, to make the correct diagnosis.

References
  1. Russo TA. Agents of actinomycosis. In: Mandell

GL, Bennett JE, Dolin R, eds. Mandell, Douglas,
and Bennett’s principles and practice of infectious
diseases. 7th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Churchill Liv-
ingstone Elsevier, 2010; 3209–3219.

  2. Smego RA Jr, Foglia G. Actinomycosis. Clin Infect
Dis 1998;26(6):1255–1261; quiz 1262–1263.
  3. Bennhoff DF. Actinomycosis: diagnostic and thera-
peutic considerations and a review of 32 cases. La-
ryngoscope 1984;94(9):1198–1217.

  4. Lely RJ, van Es HW. Case 85: pelvic actinomycosis
in association with an intrauterine device. Radiol-
ogy 2005;236(2):492–494.

  5. Oostman O, Smego RA. Cervicofacial actinomy-

cosis: diagnosis and management. Curr Infect Dis
Rep 2005;7(3):170–174.

  6. Volante M, Contucci AM, Fantoni M, Ricci R, Galli
J. Cervicofacial actinomycosis: still a difficult dif-
ferential diagnosis. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital 2005;
25(2):116–119.

  7. Kim TS, Han J, Koh WJ, et al. Endobronchial ac-
tinomycosis associated with broncholithiasis: CT
findings for nine patients. AJR Am J Roentgenol
2005;185(2):347–353.

  8. Cayley J, Fotherby K, Guillebaud J, et al. Rec-

ommendations for clinical practice: Actinomyces
like organisms and intrauterine contraceptives.
The Clinical and Scientific Committee. Br J Fam
Plann 1998;23(4):137–138.

  9. Pulverer G, Schütt-Gerowitt H, Schaal KP. Human
cervicofacial actinomycoses: microbiological data for
1997 cases. Clin Infect Dis 2003;37(4):490–497.
10. Hall V, Collins MD, Hutson R, Falsen E, Duer-
den BI. Actinomyces cardiffensis sp. nov. from hu-

man clinical sources. J Clin Microbiol 2002;40
(9):3427–3431.

11. Brown JR. Human actinomycosis: a study of 181

subjects. Hum Pathol 1973;4(3):319–330.

12. Mabeza GF, Macfarlane J. Pulmonary actinomyco-

sis. Eur Respir J 2003;21(3):545–551.

13. Hansen T, Kunkel M, Springer E, et al. Actinomyco-
sis of the jaws: histopathological study of 45 patients
shows significant involvement in bisphosphonate-
associated osteonecrosis and infected osteoradione-
crosis. Virchows Arch 2007;451(6):1009–1017.
14. Bartkowski SB, Zapala J, Heczko P, Szuta M. Ac-
tinomycotic osteomyelitis of the mandible: review
of 15 cases. J Craniomaxillofac Surg 1998;26(1):
63–67.

15. Park JK, Lee HK, Ha HK, Choi HY, Choi CG.

Cervicofacial actinomycosis: CT and MR imaging
findings in seven patients. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2003;24(3):331–335.

16. Ha HK, Lee HJ, Kim H, et al. Abdominal acti-

nomycosis: CT findings in 10 patients. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 1993;161(4):791–794.

17. Lancella A, Abbate G, Foscolo AM, Dosdegani R.
Two unusual presentations of cervicofacial actino-
mycosis and review of the literature. Acta Otorhi-
nolaryngol Ital 2008;28(2):89–93.

18. Brook I. Actinomycosis: diagnosis and manage-
ment. South Med J 2008;101(10):1019–1023.
19. Cheon JE, Im JG, Kim MY, Lee JS, Choi GM,

Yeon KM. Thoracic actinomycosis: CT findings.
Radiology 1998;209(1):229–233.

20. Han JY, Lee KN, Lee JK, et al. An overview of tho-
racic actinomycosis: CT features. Insights Imaging
2013;4(2):245–252.

21. Kwong JS, Müller NL, Godwin JD, Aberle D, Gry-
maloski MR. Thoracic actinomycosis: CT findings
in eight patients. Radiology 1992;183(1):189–192.
22. Kim TS, Han J, Koh WJ, et al. Thoracic actinomy-

cosis: CT features with histopathologic correlation.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 2006;186(1):225–231.
23. Hirschfield LS, Graver LM, Isenberg HD. Bron-
cholithiasis due to Histoplasma capsulatum subse-
quently infected by actinomycetes. Chest 1989;96
(1):218–219.

24. Seo JB, Lee JW, Ha SY, Park JW, Jeong SH, Park
GY. Primary endobronchial actinomycosis associ-
ated with broncholithiasis. Respiration 2003;70
(1):110–113.

25. Lippes J. Pelvic actinomycosis: a review and prelimi-
nary look at prevalence. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;
180(2 pt 1):265–269.

26. Cintron JR, Del Pino A, Duarte B, Wood D. Ab-

dominal actinomycosis. Dis Colon Rectum 1996;
39(1):105–108.

27. Lee IJ, Ha HK, Park CM, et al. Abdominopelvic
actinomycosis involving the gastrointestinal tract:
CT features. Radiology 2001;220(1):76–80.
28. Ko SF, Ng SH, Lee TY, Lo CW. Retroperitoneal

actinomycosis with intraperitoneal spread: stellate
pattern on CT. Clin Imaging 1996;20(2):133–136.
29. Yegüez JF, Martinez SA, Sands LR, Hellinger MD.
Pelvic actinomycosis presenting as malignant large
bowel obstruction: a case report and a review of
the literature. Am Surg 2000;66(1):85–90.

30. Acquaro P, Tagliabue F, Confalonieri G, Faccioli P,
Costa M. Abdominal wall actinomycosis simulating
a malignant neoplasm: case report and review of
the literature. World J Gastrointest Surg 2010;2(7):
247–250.

RG  •  Volume 34  Number 1

Heo et al  33

31. Kim SH, Kim SH, Yang DM, Kim KA. Unusual

causes of tubo-ovarian abscess: CT and MR imag-
ing findings. RadioGraphics 2004;24(6):1575–1589.

32. Al-Kadhi S, Venkiteswaran KP, Al-Ansari A,

Shamsudini A, Al-Bozom I, Kiliyanni AS. Primary
vesical actinomycosis: a case report and literature
review. Int J Urol 2007;14(10):969–971.

33. Yeung Y, Cheung MC, Chan GS, Cheung AN, Tam
PC. Primary actinomycosis mimicking urachal car-
cinoma. Urology 2001;58(3):462.

34. Winking M, Deinsberger W, Schindler C, Joedicke
A, Boeker DK. Cerebral manifestation of an acti-
nomycosis infection: a case report. J Neurosurg Sci
1996;40(2):145–148.

35. Smego RA Jr. Actinomycosis of the central nervous

system. Rev Infect Dis 1987;9(5):855–865.
36. Akhaddar A, Elouennass M, Baallal H, Boucetta

M. Focal intracranial infections due to Actinomyces
species in immunocompetent patients: diagnos-
tic and therapeutic challenges. World Neurosurg
2010;74(2-3):346–350.

37. Wang S, Wolf RL, Woo JH, et al. Actinomycotic

brain infection: registered diffusion, perfusion MR
imaging and MR spectroscopy. Neuroradiology
2006;48(5):346–350.

38. Chan JH, Tsui EY, Chau LF, et al. Discrimination
of an infected brain tumor from a cerebral abscess
by combined MR perfusion and diffusion imaging.
Comput Med Imaging Graph 2002;26(1):19–23.
39. Soto-Hernández JL, Morales VA, Lara Giron JC,
Balderrama Bañares J. Cranial epidural empyema
with osteomyelitis caused by actinomyces: CT
and MRI appearance. Clin Imaging 1999;23(4):
209–214.

40. Choi MM, Baek JH, Lee JN, Park S, Lee WS.

Clinical features of abdominopelvic actinomycosis:
report of twenty cases and literature review. Yonsei
Med J 2009;50(4):555–559. [Published correction
appears in Yonsei Med J 2009;50(5):737.]
41. Song JU, Park HY, Jeon K, Um SW, Kwon OJ,
Koh WJ. Treatment of thoracic actinomycosis: a
retrospective analysis of 40 patients. Ann Thorac
Med 2010;5(2):80–85.

42. Choi J, Koh WJ, Kim TS, et al. Optimal duration of
IV and oral antibiotics in the treatment of thoracic
actinomycosis. Chest 2005;128(4):2211–2217.

43. Weese WC, Smith IM. A study of 57 cases of ac-
tinomycosis over a 36-year period: a diagnostic
‘failure’ with good prognosis after treatment. Arch
Intern Med 1975;135(12):1562–1568.

This journal-based SA-CME activity has been approved for AMA PRA Category 1 CreditTM. See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

Teaching Points

January-February Issue 2014

Imaging of Actinomycosis in Various Organs: A Comprehensive Review

Suk Hee Heo, MD • Sang Soo Shin, MD • Jin Woong Kim, MD • Hyo Soon Lim, MD • Hyun Ju Seon, MD •
Sook-In Jung, MD • Yong Yeon Jeong, MD • Heoung Keun Kang, MD

RadioGraphics 2014; 34:19–33 • Published online 10.1148/rg.341135077 • Content Code:

Page 20
Actinomycotic infection should be a diagnostic consideration in the following three clinical circum-
stances: (a) a series of manifestations including chronicity, extensive propagation across tissue planes,
and firm to hard masslike features, which are frequently confused with malignant disease; (b) drainage
of an abscess by a sinus tract, which may spontaneously close and reform elsewhere; and (c) temporary
improvement after a short course of antibiotic treatment, followed by frequent relapses (1).

Page 22
This infiltrative nature may be explained by the action of the proteolytic enzymes of the organism (16).

Page 23
At CT, pulmonary actinomycotic infection usually appears as chronic segmental airspace consolidation
containing necrotic low-attenuation areas with peripheral enhancement, often accompanied by adja-
cent pleural thickening (Fig 7) (19,22).

Page 25
In cases of actinomycotic disease involving the bowel, the common CT finding is concentric wall thicken-
ing, accompanied by a cystic or solid mass in the vicinity of the affected bowel segment (Fig 12) (27).

Page 31
Penicillin G is the drug of choice regardless of the severity and site of actinomycosis (1,2,18).

