This copy is for personal use only. To order printed copies, contact reprints@rsna.org

1966

Septal Atrioventricular Junction
Region: Comprehensive Imaging
in Adults1

Farhood Saremi, MD
Cameron Hassani, MD
Damián Sánchez-Quintana, MD, PhD

RadioGraphics 2016; 36:1966–1986

Published online 10.1148/rg.2016160010

Content Codes:

1From the Department of Radiology, University
of Southern California, USC University Hospi-
tal, 1500 San Pablo St, Los Angeles, CA 90033
(F.S.,  C.H);  and  the  Department  of  Human
Anatomy,  University  of  Extremadura,  Badajoz,
Spain (D.S.). Recipient of a Magna Cum Laude
award  for  an  education  exhibit  at  the  2015
RSNA  Annual  Meeting.  Received  February  6,
2016;  revision  requested April  14  and  received
June 8; accepted July 12. For this journal-based
SA-CME  activity,  the  authors,  editor,  and  re-
viewers have disclosed no relevant relationships.
Address  correspondence  to  F.S.  (e-mail:
fsaremi@usc.edu).

©RSNA, 2016

SA-CME LEARnIng ObJECtIvES

After completing this journal-based SA-CME
activity, participants will be able to:

 ■ Discuss the relevant anatomic struc-
tures of the septal atrioventricular junc-
tion region.

 ■ Identify a specific anatomic structure
in this region by using cross-sectional
imaging.

 ■ Describe common pathologic condi-
tions related to the septal atrioventricular
junction.

See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

The septal atrioventricular junction is a centrally located region of
the heart where the septal components of the atria and ventricles
meet the aortic, mitral, and tricuspid valves. Important structures
in this region include the membranous septum, the central fibrous
body, the Koch triangle, the inferior pyramidal space, and the base
of the interventricular septum. This small area is the home of the
atrioventricular node and the atrioventricular conduction axis and
has enormous importance to electrophysiologists owing to its prime
role in the conduction system of the heart. The atrioventricular
node lies within the triangle of Koch; and the atrioventricular bun-
dle, or bundle of His, exits the atrioventricular node and penetrates
the right fibrous trigone and runs underneath the membranous
septum. The septal atrioventricular junction is a common location
for intracardiac shunts such as membranous and perimembranous
septal defects. Imaging classification of these defects can have im-
portant implications before surgical closure, because the atrioven-
tricular conduction axis passes along the posteroinferior margin
of most perimembranous defects. Extracardiac inflammatory and
malignant pathologic conditions can extend from the mediasti-
num toward the inferior pyramidal space in this region through
the epicardial fat planes. Although the anatomic structures are
complicated, the components can be shown in exquisite detail with
computed tomography (CT). In this review, the anatomic boundar-
ies and important anatomic landmarks are examined with CT and
magnetic resonance imaging. Also described are the anatomic vari-
ants of the membranous septum pertinent to percutaneous aortic
valve implantation, the vascular anatomic variants, and commonly
encountered pathologic conditions related to the septal atrioven-
tricular junction.

©RSNA, 2016 • radiographics.rsna.org

Introduction
The septal atrioventricular junction is a centrally located region of the
heart where the septal components of the atria and ventricles meet
the aortic, mitral, and tricuspid valves. This area is often and easily
overlooked by radiologists but has enormous importance owing to its
prime role in the atrioventricular cardiac conduction system. The sep-
tal atrioventricular junction is also a common location for important
intracardiac shunts such as membranous and perimembranous septal
defects. This area is of utmost importance to cardiologists when they
are performing invasive atrioventricular nodal area ablation or pacing
and is of potential importance when performing transcatheter aortic
valve implantation. Although the anatomic structures are complicated,
the components can be shown in exquisite detail with computed
tomography (CT).

CardiaC imaging

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 7

Saremi et al  1967

tEAChIng POIntS
 ■ The crux of the heart is the area of the heart where the car-
diac chambers have their maximum proximity or, considered
another  way,  where  the  atrioventricular  groove  (coronary
sulcus)  crosses  the  inferior  interventricular  groove  (posterior
interventricular sulcus).

 ■ The membranous septum has two components relative to the
attachment of the septal tricuspid leaflet: (a) an atrioventricu-
lar  component,  which  is  between  the  right  atrium  and  the
left ventricle, and (b) an interventricular component, which is
between the right ventricle and the left ventricle.

 ■ Important diagnostic characteristics of perimembranous de-
fects  include  (a)  a  subaortic  location,  (b)  fibrous  continuity
between  the  leaflets  of  the  aortic  and  tricuspid  valves,  and
(c) the presence of a membranous septum remnant (ie, inter-
ventricular component) at the posterior aspect of the defect.

 ■ The  primarily  fibrofatty  content  of  the  inferior  pyramidal
space is continuous with the epicardial fat of the inferior atrio-
ventricular and interatrial grooves. For this reason, malignant
and inflammatory pathologic conditions of the mediastinum
can spread along fat planes into the interatrial groove and the
inferior pyramidal space.

 ■ The right fibrous trigone and the atrioventricular component
of the membranous septum are collectively called the central
fibrous body, where fibrous union of the aortic noncoronary
sinus, the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve, and the septal
leaflet of the tricuspid valve occurs.

In this review, the anatomic boundaries and

important anatomic landmarks are examined
with CT and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging,
the zonal anatomic structures are described, and
commonly encountered pathologic conditions
related to the septal atrioventricular junction are
explored. The transition zone receives specific
emphasis, given its important role in the cardiac
atrioventricular conduction axis and regional
pathologic conditions.

Zonal Anatomy of the
Septal Atrioventricular Junction
The centrally located septal atrioventricular
junction resides between the muscular interatrial
septum (buttress), at the anterior rim of the fossa
ovalis, and the crest of the muscular interventric-
ular septum, which means that this junction has
both atrial and ventricular components.

From an imaging point of view, the septal
atrioventricular region can be divided into three
zones: a middle transition zone (around the
atrioventricular valves), an atrial zone (zone
proximal to the atrioventricular valves), and a
ventricular zone (distal to the atrioventricular
valves) (Table, Fig 1). Each of these zones can
be further subdivided into individual compo-
nents. The transition zone contains structures of
special anatomic and radiologic importance and
is described first.

Components of the three Zones of the Septal
Atrioventricular Junction Region

Transition zone
  Cardiac crux
  Muscular atrioventricular septum (atrioventri-

  cular fibrofatty sandwich)

  Atrioventricular membranous septum
  Interventricular membranous septum
  Right fibrous trigone, including the His bundle
Atrial zone
  Anteroinferior atrial muscular buttress
  Medial right and left atrial septal walls
  Triangle of Koch and the coronary sinus ostium
  Atrioventricular node
  Inferior pyramidal space
Ventricular zone
  Base of the muscular interventricular septum
  Right and left bundle branches
  Left ventricular outflow tract

transition Zone
In correct anatomic orientation of the heart in the
body, and from inferior to superior, the struc-
tures that make up the transition zone include
the cardiac crux, right fibrous trigone, muscular
atrioventricular septum (atrioventricular fibrofatty
sandwich), atrioventricular membranous septum,
and interventricular membranous septum. Elec-
trocardiographically gated CT angiography offers
the best anatomic detail of these structures. The
hinge of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve is
an important anatomic landmark in defining the
membranous part of the transition zone.

Cardiac Crux
The crux of the heart is the area of the heart
where the cardiac chambers have their maximum
proximity (1) or, considered another way, where
the atrioventricular groove (coronary sulcus)
crosses the inferior interventricular groove (pos-
terior interventricular sulcus). The crux of the
heart is best seen externally on inferior views of
volume-rendered CT images (Fig 2).

Knowledge of the anatomic structures of the
crux of the heart eases recognition of normal and
abnormal morphologic structures of the septal
atrioventricular junction. In the normal heart, the
right atrioventricular groove is anterior to the left
atrioventricular groove. An excellent marker of the
right atrioventricular groove is the septal leaflet of
the tricuspid valve, which is always associated with
the morphologic right ventricle. The septal leaflet
of the tricuspid valve should always be closer to
the cardiac apex, compared with the mitral valve,

1968  November-December 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  1.  Building  blocks  of  the  septal  atrioventricular  junction  region.  Color-coded
volume-rendered CT images show ventricular views (top, 1–4) and atrial views (bottom)
of the atrioventricular junction. 1, Right anterior oblique basal ventricular view shows the
base of the interventricular septum sandwiched between the left ventricle (LV) and right
ventricle (RV). 2, Similar view (70° right anterior oblique) after removal of the right ven-
tricle shows en face surface of the interventricular septum (dark blue). 3, Basal ventricular
view  after  addition  of  the  medial  right  atrial  (RA)  wall  and  the  coronary  sinus  ostium
(CSO). 4, En face basal ventricular view after addition of the left atrium (LA). Rectangles on
1, 2, and 4 show the approximate limits of the three zones of the atrioventricular junction
region. As shown, these zones involve a small central portion of the heart and overlap
each other. Major components of the transition (middle) zone include the right fibrous
trigone (RFT), the membranous septum (MS), the muscular atrioventricular (AV) septum
(superior aspect of the base of the ventricular septum), and the cardiac crux. The atrio-
ventricular (AV-MS) and interventricular (IV-MS) components of the membranous septum
are shown in green. These two components are formed by the septal attachment of the
tricuspid valve (TV) annulus. Note the offset between the septal attachments of the tricus-
pid valve annulus and the mitral valve (MV) annulus, which creates the inferior pyramidal
space extracardially. This space is located primarily in the atrial zone and is bordered by
the medial walls of the two atria and the base of the ventricular septum. The two medial
atrial walls connect to each other at the interatrial septum, which is called the anteroinfe-
rior atrial muscular buttress (not shown). The medial wall of the right atrium at the level
of the inferior pyramidal space is called the triangle of Koch (area within dashed white line
on 3, 4, and bottom right). The ventricular zone includes the left ventricular outflow tract
(LVOT) and the basal part of the muscular interventricular septum. Each zone contains
different parts of the atrioventricular conduction axis. Yellow indicates all fibrous parts of
the left ventricular outflow tract (intervalvular triangles and right and left fibrous trigones)
and the mitral leaflets, including the aortomitral fibrous continuity. AA = ascending aorta,
CS = coronary sinus, L = left coronary sinus, LAA = left atrial appendage, LFT = left fibrous
trigone, MV-AL = mitral valve aortic leaflet, N = noncoronary sinus, R = right coronary
aortic sinus, RAA = right atrial appendage, RCA = right coronary artery.

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 7

Saremi et al  1969

Figure 2.  Patterns of the atrioventricular valve leaflet septal attachments (arrows) at the cardiac crux:
Volume-rendered CT angiographic images show inferior views of the heart. The vertical and horizontal
solid lines at the cardiac crux are not perpendicular. (a) In a normal heart, the right atrioventricular
groove is anterior to the left atrioventricular groove because of the apical displacement of the septal
leaflet  of  the  tricuspid  valve  relative  to  that  of  the  mitral  valve.  (b)  In  congenitally  corrected  trans-
position of the great arteries (ccTGA), the relationship is preserved but flipped around the axis of the
septum because of the ventricular switch. (c) In atrioventricular canal defect (AVCD), there is no offset
between the two valves. (d) In the Ebstein anomaly, the offset (between arrows) can be enormous
because of the apical migration of the septal tricuspid leaflet. LA = left atrium, LV = left ventricle, RA =
right atrium, RV = right ventricle.

especially when viewed on a four-chamber image.
In other words, the tricuspid valve is normally
apically displaced relative to the hinge point of
the mitral valve. The normal distance between
the tricuspid valve and the mitral valve should
not exceed 8 mm/m2 of body surface area and is
optimally measured on a four-chamber view at the
level of the muscular atrioventricular septum (2)

(Fig 2a). Apical displacement of the tricuspid valve
of more than 8 mm/m2 is abnormal and falls into
the definition of the Ebstein anomaly, in which a
large offset between the tricuspid and mitral valve
lines is found (2–4).

In congenitally corrected transposition of the
great arteries, the offset is preserved, but the ana-
tomic position of the valves is switched along with

1970  November-December 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 3.  Comparison of the membranous septum (straight red arrow) and the muscular atrioventricular (AV)
septum (green arrow) on CT images (left and middle) and cadaveric images (right) obtained at the two levels
(double-headed red arrows) indicated on the middle image. Top: The membranous septum is clearly shown on
the CT image (top left) and the corresponding cadaveric image (top right). Bottom: The CT image (bottom left)
shows a muscular atrioventricular (AV) septum inferior to the membranous septum, and the corresponding ca-
daveric image (bottom right) shows a sliver of fat interposed between the atrial and ventricular walls at the same
anatomic level. CS = coronary sinus, 4ch = four-chamber view, IVC = inferior vena cava, IVS = interventricular
septum, LVOT = left ventricular outflow tract, MV = mitral valve, N = noncoronary sinus, SAX = short-axis view,
TV = tricuspid valve.

the ventricles, and the distance may be more than
the normal value (4) (Fig 2b). In atrioventricular
canal defect, no offset between the mitral and
tricuspid valve lines is seen (Fig 2c). In Ebstein
anomaly, marked apical displacement of the
functional tricuspid annulus into the right ven-
tricle occurs, which results in an “atrialized” right
ventricle, a small “functional” right ventricle, and
a large distance between the tricuspid and mitral
valves (Fig 2d).

Right Fibrous Trigone
The right and left fibrous trigones are thickened
fibrous tissue on the sides of the aortomitral
fibrous continuity where the nadirs of the non-
coronary and left coronary aortic sinuses are
located, respectively (1). The right fibrous trigone
is at the approximate level of the membranous
septum, located between the noncoronary sinus
of the aortic valve and the atrioventricular com-
ponent of the membranous septum (Fig 1). The
combination of the atrioventricular component
of the membranous septum and the right fibrous
trigone is called the central fibrous body.

Muscular Atrioventricular Septum
(Atrioventricular Fibrofatty Sandwich)
The muscular atrioventricular septum is de-
scribed as a section of muscle inferior to the
membranous septum where the hinges of the
atrioventricular valve leaflets are offset along the

long axis of the heart. The portion of the heart
muscle that resides in this space of about 8–10
mm has had controversial anatomic terminology
applied to it but generally is referred to as the
“muscular atrioventricular septum.” Although the
name implies that it is a muscular septum, it is
no longer considered a true septum (1). It is now
believed that this region is actually the roof of the
inferior pyramidal space formed by the apposed
walls of the medial right atrium and the muscular
interventricular septum (5). The term atrioven-
tricular fibrofatty sandwich is used by Anderson et
al (1,5) to address the anatomic composition of
this region. Fibrofatty tissue within this area is
simply the anterior continuation of epicardial fat
within the inferior pyramidal space, interposed
between the walls of the medial right atrium at
its vestibule and the crest of the muscular inter-
ventricular septum (Fig 3). Part of the medial
atrial wall at this level is also known as the septal
isthmus, an important anatomic location of inter-
est to electrophysiologists.

At CT angiography, the distal end of the
atrioventricular nodal artery on its way to the
atrioventricular node is seen within this atrio-
ventricular fibrofatty sandwich. In patients with
abundant epicardial fat, the imaging distinction
of the two separate walls of the right atrium and
the left ventricle is easy. This distinction is not
clear in patients with small amounts of epicar-
dial fat (Figs 3, 4).

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 7

Saremi et al  1971

Figure 4.  Comparison of the muscular atrioventricular septum and the atrioventricular fibrofatty sandwich. The thickness of the
fibrofatty sandwich will depend on the amount of fibrofatty elements in the inferior pyramidal space. (a) CT image clearly shows a
muscular atrioventricular septum (AVS). When fat is not depicted on the CT image, it can be difficult to differentiate an atrioventricular
fibrofatty sandwich from the all-muscular atrioventricular septum. LV = left ventricle, MV-AL = mitral valve anterior leaflet, RA = right
atrium, RV = right ventricle, TV-SL = tricuspid valve septal leaflet. (b, c) CT images show two examples of an atrioventricular (AV)
fibrofatty sandwich, one with mild fat (b) and one with moderate fat (c).The wall of the right atrium in this region (vestibule), which
is also known as the septal isthmus (thick arrow), is a common site for ablation of slow-pathway supraventricular tachycardia. Because
the atrioventricular nodal artery travels in this fibrofatty area, in those cases with a minimal amount of fat, the artery gets close to the
atrial wall, hence increasing the risk of arterial coagulation with ablative procedures.

Figure  5.  Right  anterior  oblique  (28°  RAO)  color-
coded  volume-rendered  CT  image  shows  the  rela-
tionship of the membranous septum and the septal
leaflet  of  the  tricuspid  annulus.  The  membranous
septum  is  located  between  the  muscular  interven-
tricular septum and the interleaflet trigone, between
the  noncoronary  sinus  (N)  and  the  right  coronary
sinus (R). The right fibrous trigone (RFT), where the
mitral leaflet meets the nadir of the noncoronary si-
nus,  lies  inferior  and  posterior  to  the  membranous
septum. The membranous septum is divided by the
septal leaflet of the tricuspid annulus into atrioven-
tricular  and  interventricular  parts.  AA  =  ascending
aorta,  AV-MS  =  atrioventricular  membranous  sep-
tum, IV-MS = interventricular membranous septum,
LA = left atrium, LAD = left anterior descending coro-
nary artery, RCA = right coronary artery.

Membranous Septum
The membranous septum is located centrally
within the cardiac base between the crest of the
muscular interventricular septum and the in-
terleaflet fibrous triangle, an area that separates
the noncoronary sinus from the right coronary
sinus (Figs 3, 5). The membranous septum is a
thin fibrous septum with an irregular quadran-
gular shape, which measures about 1 cm long
(5). As opposed to the muscular atrioventricu-
lar septum, the membranous septum is a true
septum.

The membranous septum has two components

relative to the attachment of the septal tricuspid
leaflet (Figs 3, 5): (a) an atrioventricular compo-

nent, which is between the right atrium and the
left ventricle, and (b) an interventricular compo-
nent, which is between the right ventricle and the
left ventricle.

Embryology.—Closure of the embryonic atrioven-
tricular communication follows several steps. An
essential step for closure of this communication
at the interventricular level is translocation of the
aortic root from the cavity of the right ventricle to
that of the left ventricle. This initial step is followed
by alignment of the subpulmonary infundibulum,
which is formed from the outflow cushions, with
the base of the muscular interventricular septum,
to reduce the size of the embryonic interventricu-
lar communication (6). On the atrial side, the

1972  November-December 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 6.  Drawings of four-chamber views of the heart show successive stages in the development of the atrioventricular
junction septum. (a) In early embryonic days, at the ventral and caudal margin of the primary septum, the muscularized ves-
tibular spine (green) and the mesenchymal cap (orange) will form and grow toward the interventricular septum to close the
primary foramen (double-headed arrow). The inferior atrioventricular (AV) cushions at the atrioventricular junction are shown,
and the breakdown of the primary septum (yellow) at the atrial roof side has occurred. (b) In the next embryonic stage, the
primary foramen is now closed by the vestibular spine (green). The secondary foramen remains open. (c) In a later stage of
development, delamination of the muscularized atrioventricular cushions has occurred, to form the atrioventricular valves and
the membranous septum. The vestibular spine will be muscularized. The secondary foramen is closed by an infolding of the
atrial wall in the atrial roof, which forms the interatrial groove filled with extracardiac fat. (d) In the final stages of develop-
ment, there is a well-formed heart. The two components of the membranous septum are formed by delamination of the septal
leaflet of the tricuspid valve. The vestibular spine remnant is seen as an atrial muscular buttress that fuses together the medial
walls of the atria at the anteroinferior aspect of the fossa ovalis. LA = left atrium, LV = left ventricle, RA = right atrium, RV = right
ventricle. Data and the sequence of events were collected from Anderson et al (5,6).

muscularized vestibular spine (Fig 6, green area)
and mesenchymal cap (Fig 6, orange area) will
appear at the ventral and caudal margin of the
primary atrial septum and grow toward the inter-
ventricular septum to close the primary atrial fora-
men (Fig 6) (5,6). Later, the rightward tubercles
of the atrioventricular cushions will produce the
membranous part of the ventricular septum and
close the gap between the ventricular septum and

the atrial septum. The left ventricular outflow tract
will be interposed between the mitral valve and the
inferior basal muscular septum. Finally, delami-
nation of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve
occurs to form the two components of the mem-
branous septum. A failure of development of the
vestibular spine and the atrioventricular cushions
results in a variable degree of septal defects at the
atrioventricular junction. Failure of delamination

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 7

Saremi et al  1973

Figure 7.  Normal membranous septum compared with an absent membranous septum. For each septal condi-
tion, a color-coded volume-rendered CT image (left) of the left side of the heart after the addition of the muscular
interventricular septum is compared with a short-axis CT image (right) obtained at the level of the left ventricular
outflow tract (LVOT). (a) Images show a normal membranous septum (red arrow) in a 45-year-old subject. (b) Im-
ages show an absent membranous septum in a 38-year-old patient. Note that the site of attachment of the septal
tricuspid leaflet is the now-muscularized membranous septum (blue arrow). CT also disclosed a small muscular
outlet ventricular septal defect (not shown). LA = left atrium, N = noncoronary sinus, R = right coronary sinus,
RVOT = right ventricular outflow tract, TV = tricuspid valve level, green arrow = aortomitral fibrous continuity.

caused by incomplete resorption of the myocardial
tissue on the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve
can result in congenital heart defects such as a
muscularized membranous septum or the Ebstein
malformation (7).

Anatomic Variation.—The relative size of the two
components of the membranous septum can vary
considerably (Figs 7, 8). In fetal life and infancy,
the interventricular component is rudimentary
and may be absent in as many as 20% of infants.
With time, the interventricular component en-
larges but remains smaller than the atrioventricu-
lar component. This conversion largely depends
on the delamination pattern of the septal leaflet of
the tricuspid valve, which produces the interven-
tricular component (8). Although in most adults,
both components exist, as many as 10% of people
have only an interventricular component, and 4%

of people have only an atrioventricular component
(8). Absence of the membranous septum may be
seen in some cases (Fig 7b).

In cases of an absent or small membranous
septum, the His bundle moves forward (ie, closer
to the aortic root). Attention to the diagnosis of
this anatomic variant in CT angiographic exami-
nations is important because it has been shown
to be associated with a higher risk of conduction
injury after percutaneous aortic valve implanta-
tion, which then requires permanent pacemaker
implantation (9). When the membranous septum
is absent, it is important to look for associated
anomalies such as a small ventricular septal defect
or an abnormal position of the aortic root (7).

Membranous Septum Aneurysm and De-
fect.—Aneurysms of the membranous septum
are more likely to occur in the interventricular

1974  November-December 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 8.  Variation in the length of the membranous septum in two patients. (a) CT image of a short membra-
nous septum in a 68-year-old man shows only the interventricular segment (arrow) of the membranous septum.
(b) MR image of a long membranous septum in a 33-year-old man with congenitally corrected transposition of
the great arteries with an intact ventricular septum shows that both the atrioventricular segment (yellow arrow)
and the interventricular segment (red arrow) of the membranous septum are long. LA = left atrium, LV = left
ventricle, MV = mitral valve, RA = right atrium, RV = right ventricle, TV = tricuspid valve.

Figure  9.  Aneurysm  of  the  membranous  septum  in  a  42-year-old  man.  (a)  Coronal  still  cine  MR  image
obtained at systole shows an aneurysm of the membranous septum formed by the septal leaflet of the tri-
cuspid valve (green arrow). A flow jet (red arrows) was depicted only during systole. (b) Four-chamber CT
angiographic image shows a possible mechanism of formation of the aneurysm. The aneurysm is postulated
to form after adhesion of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve (TV) to the rim of a preexisting membranous
ventricular septal defect (VSD), resulting in complete or incomplete closure of the ventricular septal defect.
The new pseudomembranous septum becomes aneurysmal with cardiac pressure. MV = mitral valve, RA =
right atrium, RV = right ventricle.

portion of the membranous septum, in associa-
tion with or as a result of a small membranous
or perimembranous septal defect. The etiology
of this congenital anomaly is not completely
understood, and the anomaly may be due to
abnormal primary embryologic development
or weakness of the affected tissues (10). In
hearts with a small membranous ventricular
septal defect, accessory tissue arising from the

septal or anterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve
may cover the defect and close it. At imaging,
this protective coverage sometimes results in a
characteristic aneurysmal protrusion, or wind
sock appearance, into the right ventricle, which
is due to higher left ventricular pressure during
ventricular systole (Fig 9). A small left-to-right
shunt is also commonly seen during systole.
The membranous aneurysm sac may actually

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 7

Saremi et al  1975

Figure 10.  Gerbode defect in a 48-year-old patient. Coronal (a) and short-axis (b) CT angiographic im-
ages show direct communication between the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) and the right atrium
(RA) at the level of the atrioventricular membranous septum. There is a small membranous septal defect
with shunt (red arrow) from the left ventricular outflow tract into the right atrium, between the right
coronary sinus (R) and the noncoronary aortic sinus (N), at the expected location of the membranous
septum and above the tricuspid valve (white arrows on a). RVOT = right ventricular outflow tract.

Figure  11.  Drawing  shows  various
types  of  atrial  and  ventricular  septal
defects in and around the septal atrio-
ventricular junction region. CS = coro-
nary sinus.

protruding from the systemic right ventricle into
the morphologic left ventricle can cause subpul-
monic obstruction.

An isolated defect in the atrioventricular
membranous septum with a left-to-right shunt is
known as a Gerbode defect (15,16) (Fig 10). In its
congenital form, which is extremely rare, the atrio-
ventricular defect is usually represented by a jet of
blood flow directed through a cleft in the tricuspid
valve. An elongated sail-like anterior tricuspid
leaflet in a perimembranous ventricular septal de-
fect may form a tunnel to redirect shunt from the
left ventricle into the right atrium (16). Acquired
Gerbode defects have been described in patients
after bacterial endocarditis, trauma, and aortic root
surgery. Percutaneous closure of the congenital
defect has been successfully performed (17).

Perimembranous Septal Defects.—Septal defects
at the level of the atrioventricular junction are
commonly centered in or around the membra-
nous septum (18,19). Rare defects of this region
are atrioventricular canal defects (including sep-
tum primum atrial septal defect) and an unroofed
coronary sinus ostium (Fig 11). Defects limited
to the membranous septum are relatively uncom-
mon because they may be partially or completely
sealed by the valvar tissues (20). Those defects
that remain patent usually have a defective
muscular septum at their periphery. The latter is

limit the intracardiac shunt and, in some cases,
may result in spontaneous closure of the defect.
Aneurysms of the interventricular septum are
often asymptomatic in patients with otherwise
normal cardiac anatomic structures. Aneurysm
of the interventricular membranous septum may
also be an uncommon source for occult cardiac
systemic embolism (11,12). Other associations
include tricuspid regurgitation, obstruction to
blood outflow, endocarditis, and conduction
disturbances (10,13). Elongation and aneurysm
of the membranous septum are relatively com-
mon in congenitally corrected transposition of
the great arteries (14) (Fig 8b). Because of the
absence of the subpulmonary infundibulum
in congenitally corrected transposition of the
great arteries, the pulmonary valve is close to
the mitral valve (fibrous continuity). Therefore,
a large aneurysm of the membranous septum

1976  November-December 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 12.  Perimembranous inlet defect in a 36-year-old man. (a) Sagittal still cine MR image obtained at the
level of the defect shows a subaortic 2.8-cm defect (green double-headed arrows). (b) Four-chamber MR image
shows a fibrous continuity between the aortic and tricuspid leaflets (red arrows), as well as a remnant of the
membranous septum (MS) forming the roof of the defect. AV = aortic valve, IVC = inferior vena cava, LV = left
ventricle, MV = mitral valve, PA = pulmonary artery, RA = right atrium, RV = right ventricular, TV = tricuspid valve.

Figure 13.  Atrioventricular canal defect compared with a perimembranous inlet defect. (a) Four-chamber
MR  still  cine  image  shows  an  atrioventricular  canal  defect  with  an  intact  atrial  septum  in  a  24-year-old
woman with dextrocardia. Note that the septal leaflets of the common atrioventricular valve (arrows) are
attached at the same level to the central fibrous body. (b) Four-chamber MR still cine image shows a peri-
membranous inlet defect in a 32-year-old man. There is an offset between the septal attachments of the two
atrioventricular valves. Also shown is a remnant of the membranous septum (MS). LA = left atrium.

classified as a perimembranous ventricular septal
defect (21). In tetralogy of Fallot, most defects
are perimembranous. Depending on the loca-
tion of the opening within the base of the right
ventricle, the perimembranous defects have been
classified into two types: (a) perimembranous
inlet defects (Figs 12, 13), and (b) perimembra-
nous outlet defects (Fig 14). Imaging diagnosis of
these defects can have important implications be-
fore surgical closure, because the atrioventricular
conduction axis passes along the posteroinferior
margin of most perimembranous defects (22).
Important diagnostic characteristics of peri-
membranous septal defects include (a) a subaor-
tic location, (b) fibrous continuity between the

leaflets of the aortic and tricuspid valves (Fig 12),
and (c) the presence of a membranous septum
remnant (ie, interventricular component) at the
posterior aspect of the defect (Figs 12–14).
As a reminder, in hearts with discordant
ventriculoarterial connection, perimembranous
defects are subpulmonary; therefore, the fibrous
continuity is located between the pulmonary (not
aortic) valve and the tricuspid valve. Perimem-
branous inlet defects may also be partially roofed
by the tricuspid valve.

A perimembranous inlet defect should be dif-
ferentiated from an atrioventricular canal defect
(19) (Fig 13). In atrioventricular canal defects,
there is an extensive deficiency of the inlet part of

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 7

Saremi et al  1977

is intact (Fig 11). In a muscular inlet defect, the
atrioventricular conduction axis passes anterior
and superior (not inferior) to the muscular defect.
Therefore, correct imaging diagnosis of a muscular
inlet defect is important before surgical planning.
A perimembranous defect opens to the right
ventricular outlet (between the anterior and poste-
rior limbs of the septomarginal trabecula) (Fig 14).
A perimembranous defect may demonstrate supe-
rior or inferior malalignment of the muscular outlet
septum with the remainder of the muscular inter-
ventricular septum, causing overriding of the aorta
or stenosis of the left ventricular outflow tract,
respectively. Outlet defects should be differentiated
from a doubly committed septal defect variant,
which can also be associated with malalignment of
the outlet septum, but the outlet septum in this set-
ting will be fibrous, rather than muscular, because
the muscular infundibulum (supraventricular crest)
is not normally formed (Fig 14). The characteristic
image finding is fibrous continuity between the
aortic and pulmonary valves (19).

Atrial Zone
The anatomic regions proximal to the muscular
interventricular septum that participate in the
septal atrioventricular junction region include the
muscular buttress of the interatrial septum, the
medial right and left atrial septal walls, the triangle
of Koch, the atrioventricular node, and the ostium
of the coronary sinus (Figs 1, 15). These structures
form the walls of the inferior pyramidal space on
the atrial side (Table).

Inferior Pyramidal Space
The inferior pyramidal space is a three-dimen-
sional diamond-shaped extracardiac area situ-
ated between the atrial walls and the ventricular
walls that contains fibrofatty tissue (23). Two
sides of the pyramid are formed by the right and
left atrial walls and the third side by the crest of
both ventricular walls (Fig 15). The atrial walls
join posteriorly to form the anteroinferior limbus
of the fossa ovalis, which is called the muscu-
lar septal buttress, a remnant of the embryonic
vestibular spine (24) (Figs 1, 6). The right atrial
wall in this region is where the triangle of Koch
resides. The central fibrous body is located at the
apex of the pyramid (Fig 15). The shape of the
pyramid is determined in large part by the offset
of the septal attachments of the tricuspid and
mitral valve leaflets on either side of the interven-
tricular septum, as described earlier. As a result,
the sloping wall of the right atrium overlaps the
muscular interventricular septum. Because the
inferior pyramidal space is an extracardiac region,
its size is primarily dependent on the amount of
epicardial fat, which can be large.

Figure  14.  Perimembranous  outlet  defect  in  a  73-year-
old  man.  Axial  (a)  and  short-axis  (b)  CT  angiographic  im-
ages show a perimembranous outlet defect (green double-
headed arrow). The location of the defect is subaortic, and
it opens into the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT). The
defect  is  also  perimembranous.  Note  the  remnant  of  the
membranous septum (MS) on a. The supraventricular crest
(muscular outlet septum) is well formed, a finding that dif-
ferentiates  a  perimembranous  outlet  defect  from  a  doubly
committed septal defect in which the muscular outlet sep-
tum is fibrous and small. AV = aortic valve, LA = left atrium,
LVOT = left ventricular outflow tract, PV = pulmonary valve,
RA = right atrium, TV = tricuspid valve.

the muscular interventricular septum. Characteris-
tic features of the atrioventricular canal defect with
exclusively ventricular shunting are (a) commonal-
ity of the atrioventricular junction and (b) absence
of normal midline offsetting between the mitral
and tricuspid valves (6,21) (Fig 13). The perimem-
branous inlet defect should also be differentiated
from a pure muscular inlet defect, in which the
defect is completely surrounded by the interven-
tricular septal muscle and the membranous septum

1978  November-December 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 15.
Inferior pyramidal space. (a) Short-axis (SAX) (left) and four-chamber (4ch) (right) cadaveric images show the inferior pyra-
midal space (white triangle). Dashed green line (left) indicates the anatomic level of the four-chamber section (right). (b–d) Short-axis
(SAX) (b), two-chamber (2ch) angled (c), and four-chamber (4ch) (d) CT angiographic images show normal anatomic structures. The
inferior pyramidal space (white triangle on b, c) is an extracardiac space containing fibrofatty tissue that is located between the septal
walls of the two atria and the crest of the ventricular septum in the atrioventricular (AV) region. The ostium of the coronary sinus (CS)
forms the base of the inferior pyramidal space, and the central fibrous body forms its apex. The inferior pyramidal space also contains
the atrioventricular nodal artery (red arrow) and veins (blue arrow on d). The triangle of Koch is located in the right atrial wall of the
pyramid, and the septal isthmus is depicted between the ostium of the coronary sinus and the hinge of the septal tricuspid valve. AO =
aortic valve, AV = atrioventricular, AVNa = atrioventricular nodal artery, CS = coronary sinus, IVC = inferior vena cava, L = left coronary
sinus, LCx = left circumflex coronary artery, LV = left ventricle, LVOT = left ventricular outflow tract, MPA = main pulmonary artery, MS =
membranous septum, MV = mitral valve, N = noncoronary sinus, R = right coronary sinus, RA = right atrium, RCA = right coronary artery,
SVC = superior vena cava, TV = tricuspid valve, VS = ventricular septum.

The inferior pyramidal space contains arter-
ies, veins, and nerves. The most important arterial
structure in this space is the atrioventricular nodal
artery (Fig 15). The atrioventricular nodal artery
originates from the distal part of the right coronary
artery in 70%–80% of people. In a left or codomi-
nant coronary artery system, the atrioventricular
nodal artery may arise from the terminal left
circumflex artery or, uncommonly, from both the
right coronary artery and the left circumflex coro-
nary artery (25–27). On rare occasions, the atrio-
ventricular nodal artery arises from the proximal
right coronary artery, as a continuation of the right
superior septal artery or the Kugel artery (28,29).
A rare variant of this is shown in Figure 16. Veins of
the inferior pyramidal space drain into the coronary
sinus or through the thebesian veins into the atrial
wall (30) (Figs 15d, 17). The coronary sinus itself

passes through the base of the inferior pyramidal
space. In 25% of individuals, the atrioventricular
nodal artery runs in the inferior pyramidal space
close to the right atrial vestibule where the septal
isthmus is located. In the remainder, the artery runs
near the left atrial (mitral) isthmus (25%) or in
the center of the pyramidal space (50%) (23). The
arteries that run along the valvar vestibules are at
greater risk of damage with radiofrequency ablation
lesions or during valve surgery (23,27).

The apical aspect of the pyramid is close to the
noncoronary sinus of the aorta (Figs 1, 15). The
atrial wall covering this region is called the “aortic
mound.” Infections of the aortic valve, especially
after valve replacement, may enter the inferior pyra-
midal space or form a fistula into the right atrium.
The primarily fibrofatty content of the in-
ferior pyramidal space is continuous with the

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 7

Saremi et al  1979

Figure 16.  Right coronary artery variant in a 51-year-
old  man.  Four-chamber  (4ch)  (a),  right  anterior
oblique (RAO) (b), and short-axis (SAX) (c) CT angio-
graphic images show a right coronary artery (RCA) vari-
ant with an early takeoff of the posterior descending
coronary artery (PDA) branch (yellow arrows on b, c),
which courses lateral to the right coronary sinus (R)
and the noncoronary aortic sinus (N) and then passes
between the two atria in the inferior pyramidal space
(red arrow on a, b). The posterior descending coronary
artery branch finally exits the external cardiac crux to
run in the inferior interventricular groove (blue arrow
on  b),  to  supply  the  proximal  part  of  the  interven-
tricular septum. The main right coronary artery pro-
vides additional branches to supply the distal part of
the interventricular septum (green arrows on b). LA =
left  atrium,  LAD  =  left  anterior  descending  coronary
artery, LCX = left circumflex coronary artery, LV = left
ventricle, RA = right atrium.

Figure  17.  Atrial  thebesian  vein
in  a
56-year-old  man.  Four-chamber  (4ch)  and
short-axis  (SAX)  (inset)  CT  angiographic  im-
ages  show  a  large  draining  vein  (arrows)  in
the inferior pyramidal space draining the wall
of  the  left  atrium  (LA).  This  large  thebesian
vein entered into the right atrium (RA) near
the superior vena cava (not shown). Veins an-
terosuperior to the fossa ovalis are more com-
mon. Veins inferoposterior to the fossa ovalis
in  the  inferior  pyramidal  space,  such  as  the
one depicted, are less common. Both groups
of veins pass through the interatrial groove to
empty into the right atrium near the superior
cavoatrial junction.

epicardial fat of the inferior atrioventricular and
interatrial grooves. For this reason, malignant
and inflammatory pathologic conditions of the
mediastinum can spread along fat planes into

the interatrial groove and the inferior pyramidal
space (Fig 18). Knowing this pathway of spread
can help differentiate extracardiac mediastinal
spread from primary intracardiac lesions.

triangle of Koch
The triangle of Koch occupies part of the medial
right atrial wall at the level of the inferior pyramidal

1980  November-December 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  18.  Mediastinal  lymphoma  in  a
69-year-old  man.  Four-chamber  CT  an-
giographic image shows mediastinal lym-
phoma  infiltrating  the  inferior  pyramidal
space, the tricuspid ring (arrows), and the
inferior  epicardial  fat  (not  shown).  RV  =
right ventricle.

Figure 19.  Triangle of Koch. Four color-coded volume-rendered CT images show a 70° right anterior oblique (70°
RAO) view (a), a basal view (b), a 70° RAO view (c), and a 30° RAO view (d). The triangle of Koch is part of the me-
dial wall of the right atrium (yellow area on b–d) that extends between the ostium of the coronary sinus (CS) and the
central fibrous body. The central fibrous body is formed by the right fibrous trigone (RFT) and the atrioventricular (AV)
membranous septum. (a, b) The inferior pyramidal space is located under the medial wall of the right atrium. The
base of the muscular interventricular septum (dark blue area) is interposed between the offset of the attachment of the
two atrioventricular valves. (c, d) Images show en face views of the triangle of Koch. The atrioventricular node (AVN)
is located in this region. The His bundle passes under the membranous septum, and the right bundle branch (RBB)
passes under the septal papillary muscle. FO = fossa ovalis, IV = interventricular, LA = left atrium, LV = left ventricle, N =
noncoronary sinus, R = right coronary sinus, RA = right atrial, RAO = right anterior oblique.

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 7

Saremi et al  1981

Figure 20.  Triangle of Koch. (a) Cadaveric image shows the triangle of Koch (green area) in
the medial wall of the right atrium. The posterior border of the triangle is formed by the ten-
don of Todaro (TT), which is a fibrous extension from the eustachian valve (EV). The visible part
of the tendon of Todaro in the right atrium is a prominent fold called the eustachian ridge (ER).
The anterior border is delimited by the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve (STV), and the base
is delimited by the coronary sinus ostium (CSO). The apex of this triangle corresponds to the
central fibrous body (CFB) of the heart. The septal isthmus (SI) is the wall between the coronary
sinus ostium and the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve. (b) Cadaveric image shows basal view
of the right atrium after removal of the medial wall of the right atrium at the triangle of Koch
to expose the atrioventricular nodal artery (AVNa). AV = aortic valve, CS = coronary sinus, MV =
mitral valve, TV = tricuspid valve.

space (Figs 19, 20). The triangle of Koch is the
anatomic site of the atrioventricular node and an
important site for catheter ablation procedures,
which are largely guided by using anatomic
landmarks. The central fibrous body resides at the
apex of the triangle of Koch, and the ostium of the
coronary sinus defines its base. When viewed from
the right atrium, the triangle is delimited by the
hinge line of the septal tricuspid leaflet on the ven-
tricular side and by the eustachian ridge (tendon
of Todaro) on the atrial side (31). The triangle of
Koch is the target of ablation for atrioventricular
node reentrant tachycardia, septal and paraseptal
accessory pathways, and atypical forms of atrial
flutter (32,33). The size of the triangle of Koch
varies in different individuals, with a mean height
of 26 mm ± 8 (34). Patients with large Koch
triangles require additional ablations of the septal
region, which may increase the rate of procedural
complications (34).

The medial atrial wall at the vestibule, be-
tween the rim of the coronary sinus ostium and
the hinge line of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid
valve, is known to electrophysiologists as the
septal isthmus (Figs 4, 19c, 20a). It is one of
the targets of ablation of the “slow pathway” of
atrioventricular node reentrant tachycardia. The
atrioventricular nodal artery can run extremely
close to the septal isthmus (3.5 mm ± 1.5) and
is at risk for coagulation (23,35) (Fig 20b). In
general, ablation procedures for slow-pathway

atrioventricular node reentrant tachycardia are
performed near the base of the Koch triangle,
where the transitional part of the atrioventricular
node is located, to avoid injury to the compact
atrioventricular node (fast pathway) or the atrio-
ventricular nodal artery (34,35).

The tendon of Todaro runs deep in the atrial
musculature (the sinus septum) between the coro-
nary sinus and the oval fossa. The tendon extends
from the commissure between the eustachian and
thebesian valves to the central fibrous body (36)
(Fig 20a). The tendon of Todaro is not visible on
the internal view of the right atrium. The only
visible representation of the tendon on the inter-
nal view is the eustachian ridge. This ridge can be
prominent enough to be depicted on CT images
in 25% of individuals (37). Demonstration of a
large eustachian ridge is important for catheter ab-
lation with the goal of complete paraseptal isthmus
block in patients with atrial flutter (38).

Septal Defects
On the atrial side of the septal atrioventricular
junction region, important defects include an
atrioventricular canal defect with exclusively
atrial septal shunting (ostium primum defect)
and an unroofed (fenestrated) coronary sinus
ostium. Both defects are rare in adults. Ostium
primum atrial septal defect is classified as a
partial atrioventricular canal defect, although
it is primarily a defective atrial septa caused by

1982  November-December 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  21.  Unroofed  coronary  si-
nus  in  a  54-year-old  man.  Volume-
rendered  CT  angiographic  image
shows  inferior  view  of  the  heart.
Inset:  Short-axis  image  shows  the
heart at the level of the coronary si-
nus (CS). The ostium of the coronary
sinus  (red  arrows)  is  atretic.  A  large
defect (green double-headed arrow)
is depicted between the coronary si-
nus  and  the  walls  of  the  left  atrium
(LA).  IVC  =  inferior  vena  cava,  LV  =
left ventricle, RA = right atrium.

abnormal growth of the vestibular spine to form
an anteroinferior muscular atrial buttress. In this
defect, the bridging leaflets of the atrioventricular
valves fuse to the crest of the interventricular sep-
tum, leaving only an ostium primum atrial septal
defect (39). In adults, an unroofed coronary sinus
is rare but may be found as an isolated lesion or
in patients with a history of surgery for congenital
heart disease. An unroofed coronary sinus is he-
modynamically similar to an atrial septal defect,
and the degree of shunting and defect can be
variable. In a large unroofed coronary sinus, an
atretic coronary sinus orifice and a left superior
vena cava may exist (40) (Fig 21).

ventricular Zone

The base of the muscular interventricular sep-
tum, the right and left bundle branches, and the
left ventricular outflow tract are part of the ven-
tricular side of the septal atrioventricular junction
region. Defects of the base of the muscular inter-
ventricular septum are part of perimembranous
and atrioventricular canal defects, as discussed
earlier. Although not exclusively limited to this
zone, the atrioventricular conduction axis will be
discussed in this section. Discussion of the left
ventricular outflow tract is beyond the scope of
the current review.

Atrioventricular Conduction Axis
The atrioventricular conduction axis is an es-
sential component of the septal atrioventricular
junction. The atrioventricular node lies within
the triangle of Koch just below the atrial side of
the central fibrous body, approximately at the
nadir of the noncoronary sinus of the aortic valve

(41,42). The atrioventricular node measures 5
mm in length, 2.5–3.5 mm in width, and 1.0 mm
in thickness (41,43). The superior margin of the
atrioventricular node is adherent to the central
fibrous body but is neither encased by the fibrous
tissue nor insulated from the working atrial myo-
cardium (Fig 22). The atrioventricular node has
two parts: (a) a compact part, and (b) an area of
transitional cells. The compact part is semioval
and located at the mid to apical portion of the
triangle of Koch. The area of transitional cells is
located toward the orifice of the coronary sinus
(Figs 19d, 22).

The atrioventricular bundle of His exits
the atrioventricular node, penetrates the right
fibrous trigone, and runs along the inferior
margin of the interventricular component of
the membranous septum underneath the sep-
tal attachment of the tricuspid valve before di-
viding into the left and right bundle branches
(31,43) (Figs 19d, 22). The left bundle branch
divides into the posterior, septal, and anterior
branches; and the right bundle branch courses
as a single cordlike trunk below the medial
(septal) papillary muscle complex, to enter the
inferior arm of the septomarginal trabecula
and, from there, into the moderator band. The
arterial supply to the posterior interventricu-
lar septum, the interatrial septum (including
the atrioventricular node), and the penetrating
His bundle is largely provided by the atrio-
ventricular nodal artery (27,28). The right
superior septal artery and the left first septal
artery may provide collateral vascular supply,
especially when the flow to the atrioventricu-
lar nodal artery is compromised (Fig 23) (44).

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 7

Saremi et al  1983

Figure 22.  Atrioventricular conduction axis. Left: Cadaveric image shows an inner view of the triangle of Koch (lateral wall
of the right side of the heart is removed). The three colored dashed lines (1, 2, 3) correspond to the levels at which the paired
images at right (1, 2, 3) were obtained. The anatomic course of the atrioventricular conduction axis is well dissected on this
view. Right: Three sets of paired images show a long-axis four-chamber cadaveric low-power photomicrograph (Masson tri-
chrome stain) (top) paired with the corresponding CT image (bottom) obtained at each of the three levels; these images show
the anatomic location of the cardiac conduction system at the atrioventricular junction. 1, Paired images obtained above the
coronary sinus show where the atrioventricular node (AVN) resides. The atrioventricular node is 5 mm in length and extends
to the inferior margin of the membranous septum, where the right fibrous trigone (RFT) is located. 2, Paired images show the
bundle of His (His), which is 1–2 cm in length, penetrating the right fibrous trigone (RFT) and passing below the membranous
septum. 3, Paired images show that the His bundle has divided into bundle branches at the crest of the interventricular septum
(IVS). The right bundle branch (RBB) passes below the septal papillary muscle. Therefore, a line connecting the superior edge of
the coronary sinus, the inferior margin of the membranous septum (mbs), and the inferior edge of the septal papillary muscle
demarcates the approximate location of the atrioventricular conduction axis. These three landmarks can be shown easily on
most high-quality CT angiographic images of the heart. CS = coronary sinus, IAS = interatrial septum, LBB = left bundle branch,
MV = mitral valve, N = noncoronary sinus, PM = papillary muscle, RVOT = right ventricular outflow tract, STV = septal tricuspid
valve, TV = tricuspid valve.

Figure 23.  Cadaveric image of the view
from  the  medial  wall  of  the  right  atrium
shows  the  arterial  supply  of  the  atrioven-
tricular conduction axis. The atrioventricu-
lar node (AVN), the penetrating bundle of
His  (His),  the  right  bundle  branch  (RBB),
and  atrioventricular  (AV)  nodal  artery  are
exposed. Yellow arrows indicate the atrio-
ventricular  conduction  axis.  The  atrioven-
tricular nodal artery is the main supplier of
the  atrioventricular  node.  Distal  branches
of the right superior septal artery, which is
a branch of the right coronary artery, nour-
ish the His bundle and communicate with
the atrioventricular nodal artery. Branches
of the first septal artery, which is a branch
of  the  left  anterior  descending  coronary
artery, extend to the right bundle branch
and  the  moderator  band.  CS  =  coronary
sinus, TV = tricuspid valve. (Reprinted, with
permission, from reference 44.)

1984  November-December 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 24.  Atrioventricular conduction block caused by calcifications in two patients. (a) Ax-
ial CT image of a 63-year-old man shows calcifications (within circle) involving the His bundle
(base of the membranous septum) and the bundle branches (base of the ventricular septum),
causing complete heart block. This complication is more common in patients older than 60
years.  (b,  c)  Axial  CT  angiographic  images  (rotated  for  better  orientation)  of  a  69-year-old
woman obtained before (b) and after (c) transcatheter aortic valve implantation for aortic ste-
nosis. Note the displacement of the aortic calcifications (green arrow) against the membranous
septum (red arrow) after release of the stent-valve.

The atrioventricular conduction axis can-
not be depicted with clinical imaging methods.
However, certain landmarks allow us to approxi-
mately localize this axis on CT images. These key
landmarks include the posteroinferior margin
of the atrioventricular membranous septum, the
right fibrous trigone, and the medial papillary
muscle (42). The His bundle runs underneath
the membranous septum, and the right bundle
branch runs underneath the medial papillary
muscle (Figs 19d, 22). Therefore, a line connect-
ing these two locations demarcates the location of
the atrioventricular conduction axis (43).

As a reminder, the right fibrous trigone and
the atrioventricular component of the membra-
nous septum are collectively called the central
fibrous body, where fibrous union of the aortic

noncoronary sinus, the anterior leaflet of the
mitral valve, and the septal leaflet of the tricuspid
valve occurs (31,45). At the central fibrous body,
the penetrating bundle of His is directly related
to these valves and the membranous septum. This
close association increases the risk of damage
during surgical or percutaneous manipulation of
any of these structures. Because of the proxim-
ity of these structures, large calcifications within
the anteromedial aspect of the mitral annulus or
at the noncoronary sinus of the aortic valve may
damage the His bundle, resulting in atrioventric-
ular conduction block (46–48) (Fig 24a). Atrio-
ventricular conduction block is also a relatively
common complication after transcatheter aortic
valve implantation with long self-expandable
valves (ie, CoreValve [Medtronic, Minneapolis,

RG  •  Volume 36  Number 7

Saremi et al  1985

Minn]) to treat a heavily calcified stenotic aortic
valve (9,48) (Fig 24b, 24c). Primary calcifica-
tion of the atrioventricular node is extremely rare
but has been reported (49). Invasive neoplasms,
epicardial lipomatosis, and large vascular malfor-
mations can interfere with the normal function of
the atrioventricular conduction axis (Fig 18).
The bundle of His can also be damaged by
sutures during repair of the inferior border of a
perimembranous ventricular septal defect. Other
examples of damage to the bundle branches in-
clude myocardial infarct involving the base of the
interventricular septum and damage after percu-
taneous ablation of the septal artery with alcohol
for treatment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(50). Lesions near the medial papillary muscle
can damage the right bundle branch (ie, cardiac
sarcoidosis).

In congenital heart disease, the conduction
pathway can be anatomically normal but mis-
placed because of a congenital defect (51). In con-
genitally corrected transposition of the great arter-
ies, the atrioventricular node is located anterior
in the right atrium, not in the triangle of Koch.
Accessory atrioventricular muscular connections
at the atrioventricular junction are a major cause
of preexcitation in the Wolff-Parkinson-White
syndrome (52). These anomalous pathways for
conduction can be found anywhere within the
atrioventricular junctions. However, muscular con-
nections are generally too small to be resolved by
using current clinical imaging modalities.

Conclusion

The septal atrioventricular junction has com-
plex anatomic structures that can be more easily
understood when broken down into anatomic
zones. Anatomic landmarks are a key point in un-
derstanding these complex anatomic structures.
The radiologist who is facile with the structures
in these anatomic zones can play a key role in
identifying important congenital and acquired
defects, as well as in preoperative planning for
atrioventricular nodal ablation and transcatheter
aortic valve implantation, because the cardiac
conduction axis is an essential component of the
septal atrioventricular junction.

Acknowledgment.—We thank Professor Gustavo Abuin, MD,
University of Buenos Aires School of Medicine, Buenos Aires,
Argentina, for providing Figure 23.

References
  1. Anderson RH, Ho SY, Becker AE. Anatomy of the human atrio-
ventricular junctions revisited. Anat Rec 2000;260(1):81–91.
  2. Attenhofer Jost CH, Connolly HM, Dearani JA, Edwards
WD, Danielson GK. Ebstein’s anomaly. Circulation 2007;115
(2):277–285.

  3. Zuberbuhler JR, Allwork SP, Anderson RH. The spectrum of
Ebstein’s anomaly of the tricuspid valve. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg 1979;77(2):202–211.

  4. Warnes CA. Transposition of the great arteries. Circulation

2006;114(24):2699–2709.

  5. Anderson  RH,  Spicer  DE,  Brown  NA,  Mohun  TJ.  The
development of septation in the four-chambered heart. Anat
Rec (Hoboken) 2014;297(8):1414–1429.

  6. Anderson RH, Brown NA, Mohun TJ. Insights regarding the
normal and abnormal formation of the atrial and ventricular
septal structures. Clin Anat 2016;29(3):290–304.

  7. Lin CJ, Lin CY, Chen CH, Zhou B, Chang CP. Partition-
ing  the  heart:  mechanisms  of  cardiac  septation  and  valve
development. Development 2012;139(18):3277–3299.
  8. Allwork SP, Anderson RH. Developmental anatomy of the
membranous part of the ventricular septum in the human
heart. Br Heart J 1979;41(3):275–280.

  9. Hamdan A, Guetta V, Klempfner R, et al. Inverse relationship
between membranous septal length and the risk of atrio-
ventricular block in patients undergoing transcatheter aortic
valve  implantation.  JACC  Cardiovasc  Interv  2015;8(9):
1218–1228.

10.  Tandon  R,  Edwards  JE.  Aneurysmlike  formations  in
relation  to  membranous  ventricular  septum.  Circulation
1973;47(5):1089–1097.

11.  Wu MH, Chang CI, Wang JK, Lue HC. Characterization of
aneurysmal transformation in perimembranous ventricular
septal defects: an adhered anterior leaflet of tricuspid valve
predisposes to the development of left ventricular-to-right
atrial shunt. Int J Cardiol 1994;47(2):117–125.

12.  Langer C, Horstkotte D, Piper C. Aneurysm of the mem-
branous septum causes pre-syncopes and transient bilateral
blindness. Eur Heart J 2007;28(7):784.

13.  Walpot J, Peerenboom P, van Wylick A, Klazen C. Aneu-
rysm of the membranous septum with ventricular septal
defect and infective endocarditis. Eur J Echocardiogr 2004;
5(5):391–393.

14.  Razzouk  L,  Applebaum  RM,  Okamura  C,  Saric  M.  The
windsock  syndrome:  subpulmonic  obstruction  by  mem-
branous  ventricular  septal  aneurysm  in  congenitally  cor-
rected  transposition  of  great  arteries.  Echocardiography
2013;30(8):E243–E248. doi:10.1111/echo.12279. Published
online July 1, 2013.

15.  Cheema  OM,  Patel  AA,  Chang  SM,  Shah  DJ.  Gerbode
ventricular septal defect diagnosed at cardiac MR imaging:
case report. Radiology 2009;252(1):50–52.

16.  Panduranga P, Mukhaini M. A rare type of Gerbode defect.
Echocardiography  2011;28(6):E118–E120.  doi:10.1111
/j.1540-8175.2010.01356.x.  Published  online  March
23, 2011.

17.  Vijayalakshmi IB, Natraj Setty HS, Chitra N, Manjunath
CN. Amplatzer duct occluder II for closure of congenital
Gerbode defects. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 2015;86(6):
1057–1062.

18.  Crucean A, Brawn WJ, Spicer DE, Franklin RC, Anderson
RH.  Holes  and  channels  between  the  ventricles  revisited.
Cardiol Young 2015;25(6):1099–1110.

19.  Anderson RH, Sarwark AE, Spicer DE, Backer CL. Exercises
in  anatomy:  holes  between  the  ventricles.  Multimed  Man
Cardiothorac Surg 2014;2014. pii: mmu026. doi:10.1093/
mmcts/mmu026. Published online December 24, 2014.
20.  Anderson RH, Lenox CC, Zuberbuhler JR. Mechanisms of
closure of perimembranous ventricular septal defect. Am J
Cardiol 1983;52(3):341–345.

21.  Anderson RH, Wessels A, Vettukattil JJ. Morphology and
morphogenesis of atrioventricular septal defect with common
atrioventricular junction. World J Pediatr Congenit Heart
Surg 2010;1(1):59–67.

22.  Milo  S,  Ho  SY,  Wilkinson  JL,  Anderson  RH.  Surgical
anatomy  and  atrioventricular  conduction  tissues  of  hearts
with isolated ventricular septal defects. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg 1980;79(2):244–255.

23.  Sánchez-Quintana D, Ho SY, Cabrera JA, Farré J, Anderson
RH. Topographic anatomy of the inferior pyramidal space:
relevance to radiofrequency catheter ablation. J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol 2001;12(2):210–217.

24.  Racker DK. The AV junction region of the heart: a compre-
hensive  study  correlating  gross  anatomy  and  direct  three-
dimensional analysis. I. Architecture and topography. Anat
Rec 1999;256(1):49–63.

1986  November-December 2016

radiographics.rsna.org

25.  Sow ML, Ndoye JM, Lô EA. The artery of the atrioventricular
node: an anatomic study based on 38 injection-dissections.
Surg Radiol Anat 1996;18(3):183–187.

26.  Saremi F, Abolhoda A, Ashikyan O, et al. Arterial supply
to sinuatrial and atrioventricular nodes: imaging with mul-
tidetector CT. Radiology 2008;246(1):99–107; discussion
108–109.

27.  Berdajs D, Künzli A, Shurr U, Zünd G, Turina MI, Genonni
M. Clinical anatomy of the atrioventricular node artery. J
Heart Valve Dis 2006;15(2):225–229.

28.  Abuin G, Nieponice A. New findings on the origin of the
blood supply to the atrioventricular node: clinical and surgical
significance. Tex Heart Inst J 1998;25(2):113–117.

29.  Saremi  F,  Shavelle  D.  Dual  origin,  course  and  supply  in
coronary artery system. Int J Cardiol 2013;168(5):4970–4974.
30.  Saremi  F,  Muresian  H,  Sánchez-Quintana  D.  Coronary
veins:  comprehensive  CT-anatomic  classification  and  re-
view  of  variants  and  clinical  implications.  RadioGraphics
2012;32(1):E1–E32. doi:10.1148/rg.321115014.

31.  Sanchez-Quintana  D,  Davies  DW,  Ho  SY,  Oslizlok  P,
Anderson  RH.  Architecture  of  the  atrial  musculature  in
and around the triangle of Koch: its potential relevance to
atrioventricular nodal reentry. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol
1997;8(12):1396–1407.

32.  Jazayeri MR, Hempe SL, Sra JS, et al. Selective transcatheter
ablation of the fast and slow pathways using radiofrequency
energy  in  patients  with  atrioventricular  nodal  reentrant
tachycardia. Circulation 1992;85(4):1318–1328.

33.  Coffey JO, d’Avila A, Dukkipati S, et al. Catheter ablation
of  scar-related  atypical  atrial  flutter.  Europace  2013;15
(3):414–419.

34.  Ueng KC, Chen SA, Chiang CE, et al. Dimension and re-
lated anatomical distance of Koch’s triangle in patients with
atrioventricular  nodal  reentrant  tachycardia.  J  Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol 1996;7(11):1017–1023.

35.  Delise P, Bonso A, Coro L, et al. Pacemapping of the triangle
of Koch: a simple method to reduce the risk of atrioventricu-
lar block during radiofrequency ablation of atrioventricular
node  reentrant  tachycardia.  Pacing  Clin  Electrophysiol
2001;24(12):1725–1731.

36.  Ho  SY,  Anderson  RH.  How  constant  anatomically  is  the
tendon of Todaro as a marker for the triangle of Koch? J
Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 2000;11(1):83–89.

37.  Saremi F, Pourzand L, Krishnan S, et al. Right atrial cavotri-
cuspid isthmus: anatomic characterization with multi-detector
row CT. Radiology 2008;247(3):658–668.

38.  Chang SL, Tai CT, Lin YJ, et al. The electroanatomic char-
acteristics of the cavotricuspid isthmus: implications for the
catheter ablation of atrial flutter. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol
2007;18(1):18–22.

39.  Anderson  RH,  Mohun  TJ,  Brown  NA.  Clarifying  the
morphology  of  the  ostium  primum  defect.  J  Anat  2015;
226(3):244–257.

40.  Attenhofer Jost CH, Connolly HM, Danielson GK, Dearani
JA, Warnes CA, Jamil Tajik A. Clinical features and surgical
outcome in 25 patients with fenestrations of the coronary
sinus. Cardiol Young 2007;17(6):592–600.

41.  Anderson RH, Ho SY. The architecture of the sinus node,
the  atrioventricular  conduction  axis,  and  the  internodal
atrial  myocardium.  J  Cardiovasc  Electrophysiol  1998;9
(11):1233–1248.

42.  Anderson RH, Yanni J, Boyett MR, Chandler NJ, Dobrzynski
H. The anatomy of the cardiac conduction system. Clin Anat
2009;22(1):99–113.

43.  Mori S, Spicer DE, Anderson RH. Revisiting the anatomy

of the living heart. Circ J 2016;80(1):24–33.

44.  Saremi  F,  Abolhoda  A,  Abuin  G.  Coronary  anatomy  for
surgeons. In: Saremi F, Arbustini E, Achenbach S, Narula
J, eds. Revisiting cardiac anatomy: a computed-tomography-
based atlas and reference. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell,
2010; 179–199.

45.  Sánchez-Quintana D, Yen Ho S. Anatomy of cardiac nodes
and atrioventricular specialized conduction system [in Span-
ish]. Rev Esp Cardiol 2003;56(11):1085–1092.

46.  Montemurro D, Ronzani G, Defilippi G, Pizzuti A, Brusca A.
Conduction disorders and sites of calcification of the mitral
ring: 2-dimensional echocardiographic study [in Italian]. G
Ital Cardiol 1986;16(4):308–312.

47.  Takamoto T, Popp RL. Conduction disturbances related to
the site and severity of mitral anular calcification: a 2-dimen-
sional echocardiographic and electrocardiographic correlative
study. Am J Cardiol 1983;51(10):1644–1649.

48.  Liang M, Devlin G, Pasupati S. The incidence of transcath-
eter  aortic  valve  implantation-related  heart  block  in  self-
expandable Medtronic CoreValve and balloon-expandable
Edwards valves. J Invasive Cardiol 2012;24(4):173–176.
49.  Angelini A, Moreolo GS, Ruffatti A, Milanesi O, Thiene G.
Images in cardiovascular medicine: calcification of the atrio-
ventricular node in a fetus affected by congenital complete
heart block. Circulation 2002;105(10):1254–1255.

50.  Schuller  JL,  Zipse  MM,  Krantz  MJ,  et  al.  Incidence  and
predictors of late complete heart block after alcohol septal
ablation treatment of hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopa-
thy. J Interv Cardiol 2015;28(1):90–97.

51.  Anderson  RH,  Becker  AE,  Arnold  R,  Wilkinson  JL.  The
conducting tissues in congenitally corrected transposition.
Circulation 1974;50(5):911–923.

52.  Sealy  WC.  Surgical  anatomy  of  accessory  connections
of  atrioventricular  conduction.  Ann  Thorac  Surg  1994;
57(6):1675–1683.

This journal-based SA-CME activity has been approved for AMA PRA Category 1 CreditTM. See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

