This copy is for personal use only. To order printed copies, contact reprints@rsna.org

10

Delineating Extramammary Find-
ings at Breast MR Imaging1

Yiming Gao, MD
Opeyemi Ibidapo, MD
Hildegard K. Toth, MD
Linda Moy, MD

Abbreviations: FDG = fluorine 18 fluorodeox-
yglucose, PPV = positive predictive value, STIR =
short inversion time inversion-recovery

RadioGraphics 2017; 37:10–31

Published online 10.1148/rg.2017160051

Content Codes:

1From  the Department of Radiology, New York
University–Langone Medical Center, 160 E 34th
St,  New York,  NY  10016  (Y.G.,  O.I.,  H.K.T.,
L.M.);  and  the  Center  for  Advanced  Imaging
Innovation  and  Research,  New York  University
School  of  Medicine,  New  York,  NY  (L.M.).
Recipient of a Certificate of Merit award for an
education  exhibit  at  the  2015  RSNA  Annual
Meeting. Received March 20, 2016; revision re-
quested  May  17  and  received  June  9;  accepted
July 20. For this journal-based SA-CME activity,
the authors, editor, and reviewers have disclosed
no relevant relationships. Address correspon-
dence to Y.G. (e-mail: yiming.gao@nyumc.org).

©RSNA, 2017

SA-CME LEARnIng OBjECtIvES

After completing this journal-based SA-CME
activity, participants will be able to:

 ■ Recognize that incidental extramammary
breast MR imaging findings are most likely
to be clinically relevant in those with a his-
tory of breast or other malignancy.

 ■ Explain the frequency and distribution of
extramammary findings at breast MR imag-
ing and their positive predictive values for
malignancy.

 ■ Describe common and uncommon sites of
breast cancer metastasis to extramammary
organ systems depicted on breast MR im-
ages.

See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

Breast magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is the only breast imag-
ing modality that consistently encompasses extramammary struc-
tures in the thorax and upper abdomen. Incidental extramammary
findings on breast MR images of patients with a history of breast
cancer or other malignancies are significantly more likely to be ma-
lignant and may affect staging and treatment. An understanding of
the frequency, distribution, and context of extramammary findings
on breast MR images and a familiarity with common and uncom-
mon sites of breast cancer metastasis inform the differential diagno-
sis and prompt the appropriate diagnostic next step, to differentiate
benign from malignant findings. High-yield organ systems on breast
MR images, as reflected by a high positive predictive value for ma-
lignancy, are correlated with known distant sites of breast cancer
metastasis in the bone, lung, liver, and lymph nodes. Staging is
considered when disease involves the skin and chest wall. Unusual
sites of breast cancer metastasis from invasive lobular carcinoma
are discussed, including the gastrointestinal tract, peritoneum, and
adrenal glands. Nonmalignant clinically important findings involv-
ing the cardiovascular and gastrointestinal systems are reviewed,
and potential pitfalls in diagnosis and interpretation are highlighted.
A consistently systematic diagnostic approach is emphasized for
identifying extramammary abnormalities on breast MR images. All
things considered, the radiologist should be able to improve diag-
nostic sensitivity and specificity while interpreting extramammary
findings on breast MR images.

©RSNA, 2017 • radiographics.rsna.org

Introduction

The challenge of dealing with incidental imaging findings is not a
new one. Breast magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, with its superior
soft-tissue resolution and larger field of view, is the only breast imaging
modality to consistently capture extramammary structures. Findings
in these structures are often important, because breast MR imaging is
primarily performed for breast cancer staging and high-risk screening.
Even as the use of breast MR imaging increases with time (1), further
workup of incidental extramammary findings has been shown to be of
value and cost effective (2). Overall, 16.8%–34% of breast MR imag-
ing examinations demonstrate extramammary findings, and 18.1%–
20.4% of these findings are malignant (2–4). In particular, 46%–82%
of patients undergoing breast MR imaging have either newly diag-
nosed breast cancer or a personal history of a previous diagnosis of
breast cancer (4–6); and extramammary findings are more likely to be
malignant in these patients than in others (7,8). As such, it is essential

Breast ImagIng

RG  •  Volume 37  Number 1

Gao et al  11

tEACHIng POIntS
 ■ Because osseous metastases are highly prevalent in breast can-
cer patients (approximately 60%), bone findings on breast MR
images in the setting of a history of breast cancer warrant care-
ful exclusion of metastasis, despite the likely benign causes.

 ■ Once stable radiation-induced fibrosis is established on annual
breast MR images, any further increase or change in appear-
ance beyond 1–2 years after radiation therapy should prompt
consideration of superimposed infection or tumor recurrence.

 ■ A  Rotter  node  (interpectoral  node  classified  as  level  II)  is
not routinely removed in the dissection of level I and II axil-
lary nodes and thus represents a potential site of lymphatic
spread. This location should be carefully evaluated on breast
MR images for involvement, for disease staging, and for recur-
rence surveillance.

 ■ Cardiac  conditions  incidentally  noted  on  breast  MR  images
should  be  described,  particularly  in  a  patient  who  will  be
undergoing chemotherapy for breast cancer, which can be
highly cardiotoxic (eg, doxorubicin therapy).

 ■ In  addition  to  the  common  sites  of  metastasis  to  the  liver,
lungs, bones, and lymph nodes, invasive lobular carcinoma
has  a  propensity  to  metastasize  to  locations  unusual  for  in-
vasive ductal carcinoma, including the gastrointestinal tract,
peritoneum,  retroperitoneum,  adrenal  glands,  gynecologic
organs, and leptomeninges.

for the interpreting radiologist not only to identify
the extramammary findings but also to recognize
the clinical context and the likelihood of clinical
importance, to render useful information. To that
end, the frequency, distribution, and high-yield
organ systems of malignant extramammary find-
ings on breast MR images are described, common
and uncommon sites of breast cancer metastasis
are reviewed, and the elements relevant to staging
are considered. A systematic diagnostic approach
is emphasized.

We have chosen to use the term positive pre-
dictive value (PPV) in this article as a measure
of the likelihood that an extramammary find-
ing depicted on breast MR images would be
malignant. This term allows easy incorporation
of available data and enables cogent discussion.
For the purpose of this article, PPV is defined
as the number of malignant extramammary
findings divided by the total number of extra-
mammary findings (both benign and malignant)
detected on breast MR images. This usage is
consistent throughout this article and is consis-
tent with the cited literature.

High-Yield Organ Systems for
Malignancy on Breast MR Images
The most common distant sites of breast cancer
metastasis are bone (57.5%), lung (36.1%), liver
(34%), lymph nodes (27%), and brain (34.5%)
(9–12) (Fig 1) (Table 1), the first four of which
are routinely depicted on breast MR images. In-

Figure 1.  Drawing shows various sites of breast cancer me-
tastasis.  The  most  common  sites  of  breast  cancer  metastasis
include the bones, lungs, liver, lymph nodes, and brain—the
first  four  of  which  are  routinely  depicted  on  breast  MR  im-
ages—and require careful systematic evaluation.

vestigators have shown that lesions found in the
bones, lungs, and nodes on breast MR images
are highly predictive of malignancy, with over-
all PPVs of 64%, 65%, and 62%, respectively
(Table 2) (4,5,7,8); therefore, careful assess-
ment of these locations is crucial. Interestingly,
despite the liver being a common site of breast
cancer metastasis (34%) (Table 1), lesions in
the liver depicted on breast MR images do not
yield a high PPV (5%). This observation is likely
accentuated by the particularly high prevalence
of benign hepatic lesions among women (13)
(therefore, those who undergo breast MR imag-
ing) and is confounded by the usually incom-
plete imaging of the liver on breast MR images.
In other words, because the liver is almost
always imaged only to the level of the dome and
because benign lesions such as cysts or heman-
giomas are so common in women, the discrep-
ancy between the higher frequency of breast
cancer metastasis to the liver and the lower
PPV of hepatic lesions on breast MR images is
perhaps not entirely unexpected. Liver lesions
nevertheless deserve careful attention, given that
the liver is a common location for breast cancer
metastasis. Other extramammary findings iden-
tified on breast MR images, including pleural or
pericardial effusions, are reported to have a low
PPV (6.3%) for malignancy (4).

Common Distant Sites of Metastasis

Bones

Breast Cancer Metastasis: High Propensity for
Bones.—The bones are the most common site of
breast cancer metastasis, and metastasis to bone
is found in approximately 60% of the women with

12

January-February 2017

radiographics.rsna.org

Table 1: Frequency of Site-specific Metastasis by Subtypes of Metastatic Breast Cancer

Frequency of Site-specific Metastasis (%)

Subtype of Metastatic Breast Cancer

Bone

Lung

Liver

Brain

Distant Nodal

Luminal A
Luminal B
HER2 positive, ER/PR positive
HER2 positive, ER/PR negative
Basal-like
TN nonbasal
  Overall frequency

66.6
71.4
65.0
59.6
39.0
43.1
57.5

23.8
30.4
36.8
47.1
42.8
35.8
36.1

28.6
32.0
44.4
45.6
21.4
32.1
34.0

7.6
10.8
15.4
28.7
25.2
22.0
34.5

15.9
23.3
22.2
25.0
39.6
35.8
27.0

Note.—Adapted, with permission, from reference 10. ER = estrogen receptor, HER2 = human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2, PR = progesterone receptor, TN = triple negative.

Table 2: PPVs of Extramammary Findings on Breast MR Images

PPV (%)

Study

Rinaldi et al (4)
Morakkabati-Spitz et

al (8)

Iodice et al (5)
Moschetta et al (7)
  Overall PPV

Year

2011
2003

2013
2014
…

Bone

Lung

Liver

Nodes*

89
73

26
66
64

59
100

17
83
65

9
8

2
0
5

83
81

21
NA†
62

MR Imaging
Examinations (n)

1535
1013

828
308
3684‡

*Nodes category does not differentiate between regional and distant nodal metastases.
†NA = not applicable (because no nodal lesions were reported in this study).
‡Total number of examinations.

metastatic disease (10,12,14) (Table 1). Those
with bone metastases from breast cancer have a
median survival of 33.2 months (15). The bones
also represent the most common exclusive first
site of disease spread in women with early-stage
(stages I and II) breast cancer after treatment with
breast conservation therapy and whole-breast
radiation therapy, with such spread often manifest-
ing 10–15 years after the initial diagnosis of breast
cancer (9). This observation highlights the impor-
tance of careful evaluation of osseous structures
at surveillance breast MR imaging examinations,
particularly given the high PPV of 64% for bone
findings depicted on breast MR images (Table 2)
(4,5,7,8). Of interest, triple-negative breast can-
cers (particularly the basal-like subtype) metasta-
size to the bones significantly less frequently (P <
.001) (10) than other subtypes (10,16) (Table 1),
although still with a high enough metastatic rate to
the bone (39% for the basal-like subtype) to war-
rant careful osseous evaluation.

Evaluation of the Bones.—Although coverage
of the spine is variable, depending on the cho-

sen field of view, the midline anterior osseous
structures (manubrium, sternum, and xiphoid
process) (Fig 2) and the ribs are usually depicted
and should be scrutinized with T1-weighted
sequences before and after contrast material
administration (for abnormal signal intensity and
enhancement) and with T2-weighted sequences
(for marrow edema) to assess for osseous me-
tastases (Fig 3). Multiple lesions and associated
soft-tissue masses are highly suggestive of metas-
tases. Evaluation of diffuse osseous involvement is
often challenging and requires an understanding
of normal bone marrow signal intensity on MR
images to determine a correct diagnosis. Bone
findings can be subtle on breast MR images and
thus warrant consistent inclusion in the search
pattern (Fig 3). The spine is far posterior in the
field of view on breast MR images on both sagit-
tal and axial projections, and partially depicted
abnormalities are easy to miss. Therefore, multi-
planar correlation and assessment with multiple
imaging sequences are helpful. Occasionally,
benign intraosseous hemangiomas are depicted
in the spine or in the sternum as circumscribed

RG  •  Volume 37  Number 1

Gao et al  13

Figure 2.  Osseous metastasis in a
52-year-old woman with newly di-
agnosed invasive ductal carcinoma
in  the  right  breast.  Axial  (a)  and
sagittal (b) contrast-enhanced T1-
weighted MR images show an en-
hancing lesion (arrow) in the ster-
num, a finding consistent with an
osseous metastasis. On breast MR
images, midline osseous lesions are
often found in the sternum, manu-
brium, and xiphoid process.

Figure  3.  Osseous  metastases  in  a  40-year-old  woman  with  newly
diagnosed cancer in the left breast who underwent breast MR imaging
to evaluate the disease extent. (a, b) Axial T2-weighted (a) and con-
trast-enhanced T1-weighted subtraction (b) MR images show edema
and  subtle  abnormal  enhancement  in  multiple  bilateral  ribs  and  the
sternum  (solid  arrow),  findings  that  were  highly  suspicious  for  osse-
ous metastases. An anterolateral left rib was fractured (dashed arrow).
The findings from a subsequent bone scan helped confirm diffuse me-
tastases (not shown). Computed tomography (CT) was performed to
exclude pathologic fractures involving the spine. (c) Coronal CT im-
age shows diffuse osseous metastases involving the spine, manubrium,
sternum, pelvis, and ribs. CT helped confirm the pathologic fracture of
the anterolateral left rib (not shown).

nonaggressive T1-hyperintense (fatty stroma)
and T2-hyperintense (vascular channels) lesions
(Fig 4). Spine hemangiomas usually correspond
to coarsely trabeculated lesions in a “corduroy
pattern” without cortical breach on CT images.

When the morphologic structure is atypical, a
bone scan is often required to exclude the pos-
sibility of an osseous metastasis.

Overlap of Benign and Malignant Findings.—
Breast cancer survivors are prone to osteoporosis
and fractures (17,18). This tendency is due to
direct bone depletion or premature ovarian failure
related to chemotherapy and endocrine therapy
or is secondary to prophylactic oophorectomy. In

14

January-February 2017

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 4.  Sternal lesion depicted on screening breast MR images in a 34-year-old woman with a family history
of  breast  cancer.  Sagittal  contrast-enhanced  T1-weighted  (a)  and  axial  T2-weighted  (b)  MR  images  show  a
smoothly circumscribed T2-hyperintense sternal lesion (arrow), which was thought to contain fat, given its high
signal intensity on nonenhanced T1-weighted MR images (not shown). This lesion was determined to be an
intraosseous hemangioma at subsequent dedicated musculoskeletal MR imaging (not shown).

older women, a baseline higher risk of osteoporosis
is further exacerbated by the posttreatment effects
of therapy with aromatase inhibitors. As such,
both benign and malignant fractures are common
in this group. Although imaging features sugges-
tive of benign fractures compared with malignant
fractures have been described on MR images,
differentiating between the two is not always pos-
sible (19,20). For that reason and because osseous
metastases are highly prevalent in breast cancer
patients (approximately 60%) (10), bone findings
on breast MR images in the setting of a history of
breast cancer warrant careful exclusion of metasta-
sis, despite the likely benign causes (Fig 5).

Lungs

Physiologic versus Pathologic Pleural Effu-
sions.—Pleural effusions are common findings
on breast MR images, with physiologic pleural
effusions reported in 87% of healthy subjects
undergoing screening breast MR imaging (6),
which may account for the low PPV for malig-
nancy (6%) reported in the literature (4). How-
ever, the pleural space is a known location of
breast cancer metastasis, with the investigators
in one study reporting the pleural space to be
the site of breast cancer metastasis 31.2% of the
time when combined with the peritoneal space
(10). Thus, malignant effusions must be distin-
guished from physiologic effusions. Investiga-
tors have shown physiologic pleural effusions to
be more commonly bilateral (71%) and, when
unilateral, more frequently right sided than left
sided, with a normal reference size range of up

to 7 mm on the right and up to 5 mm on the
left (6). In contrast, a malignant pleural effu-
sion tends to be unilateral and moderate to
large in size (size refers to maximum depth of
fluid measured from the posterior chest wall on
axial projection) (Fig 6), with the patient usu-
ally having a clinical history of current or prior
breast cancer. In this scenario, adjacent ana-
tomic structures must be scrutinized to assess
for metastasis (Fig 6). Occasionally, a benign
but clinically important pleural effusion may be
depicted, which requires further identification
of its benignity (Fig 7). In short, a moderate
to large unilateral pleural effusion depicted on
breast MR images, particularly in a patient with
a history of breast cancer, warrants careful fur-
ther evaluation to exclude a malignant cause.

Common Benign Pulmonary Findings.—Breast
conservation therapy comprises surgical exci-
sion followed by whole-breast radiation therapy.
Because the radiation beam traverses the entire
path of the treated breast, lung tissue is affected.
After radiation therapy (typically 30–40 Gy),
early lung injury (at 6–8 weeks) manifests as
radiation pneumonitis (worst at 3–4 months)
and becomes stable radiation-induced fibro-
sis by 9–12 months (21,22) (Fig 8). Radiation
pneumonitis appears as patchy consolidations
or signal intensity abnormalities in the lung that
are confined within sharp margins conform-
ing to the radiation portal. Radiation-induced
fibrosis is more frequently depicted on breast MR
images because most patients do not typically
begin MR imaging surveillance until 1 year after

RG  •  Volume 37  Number 1

Gao et al  15

Figure 5.
Incidental left rib fracture on surveillance breast MR images in a 71-year-old woman
with a remote history of cancer in the right breast. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted
MR image shows incidental findings of a left rib fracture (solid arrow), as well as a large hiatal
hernia (dashed arrow). At a recent prior examination with dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry,
the T-score was –2.8. (b) Sagittal scout image shows a midthoracic subacute burst fracture
(arrow). Further inquiry of the patient disclosed a history of a fall, which helped confirm the
diagnosis of a traumatic rib fracture in this patient with osteoporosis. Nevertheless, given her
history of breast cancer, bone scintigraphy was performed to rule out osseous metastasis, and
the findings were negative.

Figure 6.
Incidental pleural effusion at the first surveillance MR imaging examination in 5 years in a 50-year-old woman with a
history of cancer in the left breast who had undergone bilateral mastectomy. (a) Axial T2-weighted MR image shows a moderate
right-sided pleural effusion (arrow). (b) Coronal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted subtraction MR image shows an enhancing right
parasternal metastasis involving multiple intercostal spaces (arrows) and inciting a malignant pleural effusion.

treatment. Radiation-induced fibrosis appears
as a subpleural linear band of enhancement in
the lung, often with frayed edges (Fig 8). Once
stable radiation-induced fibrosis is established on
annual breast MR images, any further increase
or change in appearance beyond 1–2 years after
radiation therapy should prompt consideration of
superimposed infection or tumor recurrence. In
contrast, dependent atelectasis, another common
benign pulmonary finding on breast MR images,
is transient. This finding is depicted as a signal
intensity abnormality in a linear or triangular
configuration with concave margins (Fig 9) that

is located anteriorly in a prone patient, indicating
dependent collapse of normal lung tissue, and is
of no clinical consequence.

Evaluation of the Lungs.—The lungs are a com-
mon site of breast cancer metastasis (36.1%), not
to mention primary lung cancer, and pulmonary
findings on breast MR images carry a high PPV
of 65% (Tables 1, 2) (4,5,7,8,10). A patient with
breast cancer metastasis to the lung has an expected
median survival of 22.4 months (15). Therefore, the
lung should be scrutinized on breast MR images.
Careful adjustment of window level settings is often

16

January-February 2017

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 7.
Incidental pleural effusion on breast MR images in a 62-year-old woman who had benign findings at prior left breast
surgery. (a) Axial short inversion time inversion-recovery (STIR) MR image shows an incidental finding of a right-sided pleural effu-
sion (arrow) that was slightly larger than expected for physiologic fluid. Further evaluation was performed. (b) Axial STIR MR image
obtained subsequently shows a right middle lobe pulmonary consolidation (arrow), which was causing a secondary effusion. The
patient reported a mild cough and was subsequently treated for pneumonia.

Figure  8.  Radiation-induced  fibrosis  in  a  52-year-old  woman  with  a  history  of  invasive  ductal  car-
cinoma  of  the  right  breast  who  had  been  treated  with  bilateral  mastectomy  with  transverse  rectus
abdominis myocutaneous (TRAM) flap reconstruction and radiation therapy of the right breast 5 years
previously. Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted (a) and sagittal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted sub-
traction (b) MR images show a stable linear right-sided subpleural area of enhancement (arrows) with
frayed edges, findings consistent with radiation-induced fibrosis.

necessary to depict pathologic conditions, because
the lung is not optimally displayed with the default
breast MR imaging parameters (Fig 10a). On the
other hand, with improvements in the breast MR
imaging technique and resolution, even subtle find-
ings in the lung are able to be seen if viewing condi-
tions are optimized (Fig 11). The central, pericar-
dial, and perihilar region and the peripheral regions
of the lungs are prone to degradation by cardiac
and respiratory motion and should be carefully
evaluated on all available projections (Fig 10c, 10d).
To further define pulmonary findings depicted on
breast MR images, cross-modality correlation with
images from prior examinations is helpful, often
allowing confirmation of stable benign lesions (Fig

12). Chest CT is the reference standard for evaluat-
ing pulmonary findings. If no prior chest images
are available, chest CT is appropriate for further
evaluation, particularly in the setting of a history of
breast cancer.

Liver

Importance of Liver Evaluation.—Focal liver
lesions are the most common extramammary
findings on breast MR images, accounting for
44%–52% of these findings (2,4,5). Although the
PPV of focal liver lesions on breast MR images
is only 7% (4), the liver is, in fact, a common
metastatic site not only for breast cancer (34%)

RG  •  Volume 37  Number 1

Gao et al  17

Figure 9.  Dependent atelectasis on screening breast MR images in a 32-year-old woman with a family
history of breast cancer. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows a triangular hyper-
intense area (arrow) in the right cardiophrenic angle, a finding consistent with atelectasis. (b) Sagittal
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows a linear hyperintense area (arrow) in the right cardio-
phrenic angle, a finding consistent with atelectasis. Dependent atelectasis is a common finding on breast
MR images and is located anteriorly because of the prone positioning of the patient.

(Table 1) (10), but also for many other malignan-
cies, including those of the gastrointestinal tract,
lungs, and skin. Identifying a liver metastasis is
important, because it indicates a poor progno-
sis. On average, the reported median survival of
patients with metastatic breast cancer to the liver is
only 12 months (15). The low PPV of liver lesions
on breast MR images may in part be explained by
incomplete hepatic imaging on breast MR images
and by a high prevalence of benign hepatic lesions
such as cysts or hemangiomas, which are not only
common but also particularly prevalent among
women (23,24). Therefore, despite the low PPV
of liver lesions on breast MR images (4), the liver
requires careful evaluation to exclude the possibil-
ity of metastasis. Note that the liver is imaged to a
variable extent on axial, sagittal, and coronal pro-
jections, and focal lesions may be partially imaged
or only depicted on one projection.

Cystic Liver Lesions.—Hepatic cysts are exceed-
ingly common and in most cases can be confi-
dently diagnosed on breast MR images; hepatic
cysts are seen as T2-hyperintense, well-circum-
scribed thin-walled nonenhancing masses (Fig
13). For cystic hepatic lesions that may be too
small to fully characterize on MR images, cross-
modality correlation to CT or ultrasonographic
(US) images and comparison with images from
prior examinations are helpful to confirm a be-
nign cause. Occasionally seen, diffuse, scattered,
T2-hyperintense nonenhancing hepatic lesions
measuring less than 1.5 cm throughout the liver
may also represent biliary hamartomas (also
known as von Meyenburg complexes), which
are remnants of embryonic bile ducts. However,
hepatic cysts are far more common than biliary

hamartomas. It is essential to assess T2-hyperin-
tense liver lesions depicted on breast MR images
with contrast-enhanced breast MR images for
a complete evaluation. Although the exact PPV
of cystic liver lesions on breast MR images is
unknown, cystic metastases from breast, ovarian,
lung, and colorectal cancer, sarcoma, and mela-
noma do occur because of necrosis and cystic
degeneration, and these cystic metastases usually
demonstrate less-circumscribed margins with
enhancing components on MR images (23,25).

Solid Liver Lesions.—The most common solid
liver lesions are metastases. Among women
with metastatic breast cancer, liver metastases
are found 34% of the time (Table 1) (10). The
appearance of metastatic lesions in the liver is
highly variable but can be T1 hypointense and
moderately T2 hyperintense, with washout on
delayed contrast-enhanced images (26). He-
mangiomas are the second most common solid
liver lesions seen on breast MR images, because
they are most prevalent in women, particularly
in postmenopausal women. On breast MR im-
ages, the typical enhancement pattern of initial
peripheral nodular and progressive centripetal
enhancement clinches the diagnosis (Fig 14);
but when this pattern is absent, metastasis must
be excluded. In fact, any previously unevaluated
solid liver lesion should undergo dedicated liver
imaging including CT or MR imaging for further
evaluation, unless the typical enhancement pat-
tern of a hemangioma is seen. Because the liver
is seldom imaged in its entirety on breast MR
images, partially imaged findings may be subtle.
Optimizing window level settings and looking for
secondary signs such as postobstructive biliary

18

January-February 2017

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  10.  Pulmonary  findings  on  breast  MR  images  in  two  patients.  (a,  b)  Large  necrotic  mass  in  a  53-year-old
woman with breast cancer. Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR images obtained before (a) and after (b) win-
dowing show that careful adjustment of the window level settings optimized the incidental depiction of a large necrotic
mass (arrow) in the right pulmonary apex, a finding consistent with a primary lung cancer. (c, d) New pulmonary
nodules in a 57-year-old woman with a history of breast cancer. (c) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image
shows new pulmonary nodules (solid and dashed arrows). The lingular nodule (dashed arrow) abuts the pericardium.
(d) Axial CT image also shows the lingular nodule (arrow) abutting the pericardium.

dilatation can help identify important abnormali-
ties (Fig 15). Other solid liver lesions depicted on
breast MR images include focal nodular hyper-
plasia and hepatic adenoma, both of which also
demonstrate a strong predilection for women;
hepatic adenoma is associated with the use of oral
contraception in women of childbearing age.

Diffuse Liver Pathology.—It is important not to
overlook diffuse hepatic changes on breast MR im-
ages. Hepatosteatosis, for example, is a common
form of diffuse liver changes. Although a frequent
finding on abdominal MR images, hepatosteatosis
is difficult to appreciate on breast MR images
unless it is severe. Hepatosteatosis is more com-
mon among breast cancer patients (63%–72%)
than among healthy women (48%) (27). Although
this difference is likely multifactorial, tamoxifen
therapy has been reported to exacerbate hepatos-
teatosis or steatohepatitis, both often associated
with abnormal results of a liver function test (28).
Of interest, a higher incidence of liver metasta-
ses has also been associated with hepatosteatosis
among women with metastatic breast cancer (29).

Hepatosteatosis can be diffuse or patchy and ap-
pears as increased signal intensity on T1-weighted
MR images. In the absence of in-phase and out-of-
phase gradient-echo MR images, however, breast
MR imaging does not depict hepatosteatosis well.
Liver being hyperintense relative to the spleen on
T1-weighted MR images is helpful and suggestive
of liver fatty infiltration (30).

Occasionally, contour and textural abnormali-
ties of the liver are noted on breast MR images,
findings that indicate cirrhosis (Fig 16a, 16b). A
small nodular cirrhotic liver may house primary
hepatocellular carcinoma and may be associated
with ascites caused by portal hypertension. Cir-
rhosis is nodular regeneration, fibrosis, and archi-
tectural distortion resulting from liver cell injury.
Whereas cirrhosis is caused by alcohol abuse, viral
hepatitis, steatohepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis,
Wilson disease, and hemochromatosis, to name
just a few, pseudocirrhosis is a known complica-
tion of chemotherapy for diffuse liver metastases
from breast cancer and is mostly unique to this
clinical setting (Fig 16c). Diffuse breast cancer
metastases to the liver after chemotherapy can

RG  •  Volume 37  Number 1

Gao et al  19

Figure 11.  Pulmonary findings on breast MR images in three patients. (a, b) Peripheral area of abnormal signal
intensity  in  the  right  lung  in  a  42-year-old  woman  with  lupus  erythematosus.  (a)  Axial  contrast-enhanced  T1-
weighted MR image shows a peripheral area of abnormal signal intensity (arrows). (b) Axial CT image shows that
the area of abnormal signal intensity on a corresponds to CT findings of nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (ar-
rows). (c–e) Pulmonary nodule in a 59-year-old woman with previous breast cancer. (c) Axial contrast-enhanced
T1-weighted MR image shows a pulmonary nodule (arrow). (d, e) Axial chest CT images obtained 3 years before
image in c (e obtained higher than d) show the corresponding pulmonary nodule (arrow on d), as well as bron-
chiectasis and additional bilateral nodular opacities, findings consistent with mucoid impaction. (f) Axial contrast-
enhanced T1-weighted MR image of a 64-year-old woman with previous breast cancer shows nonenhancing right
apical pulmonary fibrosis (arrow) from remote tuberculosis.

result in subcapsular retraction, mimicking the
appearance of cirrhosis. Although the pathophysi-
ology is not well understood, pseudocirrhosis is
thought to be related to diffuse tumor infiltration
of hepatocytes and the chemotoxic effect caus-
ing fibrosis. Despite its radiographic similarity to
cirrhosis, pseudocirrhosis does not have histo-
logic findings of regenerative nodules and bridg-
ing fibrosis, which are defining changes of true

cirrhosis. The complications of cirrhosis, such as
portal hypertension and ascites, are less common
in pseudocirrhosis but do occur (31).

Lymph Nodes

Regional Lymphatic Spread.—Breast cancer with
regional lymphatic spread portends a poor progno-
sis and increases the stage of the disease. The PPV

20

January-February 2017

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 12.  Cross-modality correlation of pulmonary findings in two patients with a history of breast cancer. (a, b) Pulmonary mass
in the right middle lobe in a 44-year-old woman. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows a possibly necrotic pul-
monary mass (arrow) in the right middle lobe. (b) Axial nonenhanced CT image shows that the mass in a corresponds to a benign
calcified granuloma (arrow). (c, d) Subpleural area of enhancement in the left upper lobe in a 76-year-old woman. (c) Axial contrast-
enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows a subpleural area of enhancement (oval) in the left upper lobe. (d) Axial contrast-enhanced
CT image shows that the subpleural area of enhancement in c corresponds to an area of densely calcified fibrothorax (oval) from a
previous tuberculous empyema.

Figure 13.  Hepatic cysts depicted on a local staging
breast MR image in a 48-year-old woman with newly
diagnosed left breast cancer. Axial T2-weighted STIR
MR  image  shows  the  newly  diagnosed  breast  can-
cer (dashed arrow), as well as multiple T2-hyperin-
tense, well-circumscribed thin-walled nonenhancing
masses (solid arrows) in the liver, which are consis-
tent with benign hepatic cysts. Benign hepatic cysts
are common incidental findings.

of nodal findings on breast MR images is 62% (Ta-
ble 2) (4,5,7,8). Regional lymph nodes are defined as
ipsilateral axillary level I, II, and III nodes (level III
equates to medial infraclavicular), supraclavicular
nodes, and internal mammary nodes (32). Levels
I, II, and III axillary nodes are located, respectively,
inferior lateral to, posterior to, and superior medial
to the pectoralis minor muscle. Beyond level I
axillary lymph nodes, mammography and US do
not consistently evaluate deeper nodes well. In
contrast, breast MR imaging depicts apical axil-
lary nodes and internal mammary nodes to better
advantage, given a larger field of view. Adding MR

RG  •  Volume 37  Number 1

Gao et al  21

Figure 14.  Hemangioma on breast MR images in a 52-year-old woman. (a) Axial T2-weighted STIR MR image shows a T2-hyper-
intense large right hepatic mass (*) that was hypointense on T1-weighted images (not shown).  (b) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-
weighted subtraction MR image shows initial peripheral nodular and progressive centripetal enhancement, findings consistent with
a giant hemangioma.

Figure  15.
Incidental  diffuse  liver  changes  in  a  65-year-old  woman  with  recently  diagnosed  estrogen  receptor–positive,
progesterone  receptor–positive  cancer  in  the  right  breast  depicted  at  mammography  and  US,  who  underwent  breast  MR
imaging to evaluate the extent of disease. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image obtained without window level
adjustment shows that the liver is mildly heterogeneous. (b) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image obtained after
window level adjustment shows that adjusting the window level optimized the depiction of a hepatic mass (arrows). (c) Axial
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image of a different section shows postobstructive intrahepatic biliary dilatation (arrows),
a sentinel secondary sign to help identify a mass. (d) Subsequent dedicated axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image of
the liver better showed the mass, and the patient underwent biopsy with US guidance. The results of histopathologic examina-
tion disclosed adenocarcinoma, a finding consistent with metastatic disease.

(33). However, the evaluation of supraclavicular
lymph nodes is less consistent and is limited by
the superior extent of the field of view on breast
MR images. The most common site of regional
lymph node recurrence is the axilla (51%) (34).
Regional nodal recurrence after breast conserva-
tion therapy may be salvaged if not associated with
simultaneous distant metastases, with a reported
10-year survival rate of 44% (34). Careful evalua-
tion of regional lymph nodes on breast MR images
is therefore essential, both at initial TNM (tumor,
node, metastasis) staging (Fig 17) and at later sur-
veillance (Fig 18). Abnormal lymph nodes on MR
images appear enlarged and heterogeneous, often
with an effaced central fatty hilum (Fig 17b).

imaging to US has also been shown to reduce the
false-negative rate and increase the negative predic-
tive value (98%) in the evaluation of axillary nodes

22

January-February 2017

radiographics.rsna.org

Incidental  diffuse  liver  changes  on  breast  MR  images  in  two  patients.  (a,  b)  Diffuse  liver  changes  in  a
Figure  16.
57-year-old  woman  with  a  history  of  ductal  carcinoma  in  situ  10  years  previously.  (a)  Axial  contrast-enhanced  T1-
weighted MR image shows that the liver appeared small and heterogeneous in enhancement, and the liver margin
was noted to be slightly irregular (arrows) on limited assessment. (b) Axial US static image helps confirm the nodular
liver contour in this patient with untreated hepatitis C who has developed cirrhosis. (c) Diffuse liver metastases in a
56-year-old  woman  after  chemotherapy  for  triple-negative  invasive  ductal  carcinoma.  Axial  contrast-enhanced  T1-
weighted MR image shows that the liver appears diffusely nodular with subcapsular retraction, findings consistent with
pseudocirrhosis.

The convention of preoperative determina-
tion of axillary nodal involvement prompting
axillary lymph node dissection was called into
question a few years ago by the American Col-
lege of Surgeons Oncology Group (ACOSOG)
Z0011 trial (35), which found no benefit in
performing axillary lymph node dissection
in women with early-stage T1 or T2 invasive
cancers and one or two positive sentinel lymph
nodes treated with chemoradiation therapy, as
compared with sentinel lymph node dissection
(Fig 17). The implications of these results have
been debated, and the study’s short follow-up
(median, 6.3 years) and small sample size were
criticized. Despite this controversy, because axil-
lary lymph node dissection does not routinely
include deeper regional lymph nodes (Fig 19),
assessment of these nodes on breast MR im-
ages is still of value. For example, a Rotter node
(interpectoral node classified as level II) is not
routinely removed in the dissection of level I
and II axillary nodes and thus represents a po-
tential site of lymphatic spread (36). This loca-
tion should be carefully evaluated on breast MR
images for involvement, for disease staging, and
for recurrence surveillance. Similarly, MR imag-
ing–detected involvement of internal mammary

and supraclavicular lymph nodes alters radiation
therapy planning and should be described.

Distant Lymphatic Metastasis.—Breast cancer
metastasis to lymph nodes other than the ipsilat-
eral regional lymph nodes is considered distant
spread and is classified as M1 disease according to
the American Joint Committee on Cancer TNM
staging classification (32). Distant nodes include
the ipsilateral cervical, mediastinal, and any con-
tralateral lymph nodes, which are involved 27% of
the time in the setting of metastatic breast cancer
(Table 1) (10) (Fig 18). Distant nodal metasta-
sis indicates a poorer prognosis, compared with
regional nodal spread, with a reported median sur-
vival of 43 months (15). In particular, mediastinal
nodal metastasis is common in advanced breast
cancer; mediastinal nodal metastasis has been
reported in 71% of women with metastatic breast
cancer in the findings from an autopsy series (37)
and has a high PPV of 83% for malignancy (4).
Assessment of the mediastinum on breast MR
images can be challenging, and adenopathy may
be obscured by hilar structures or be degraded by
respiratory motion; nevertheless, the mediastinum
should be consistently included in nodal evalua-
tion (Fig 18).

RG  •  Volume 37  Number 1

Gao et al  23

Figure 17.  Staging of a newly diagnosed invasive ductal carcinoma of the right breast with breast MR imaging in a 52-year-old
woman. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows an invasive ductal carcinoma (arrow) less than 3 cm in diameter
in the right breast. (b) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image (different section, obtained higher in the axilla) shows a single
enlarged right axillary lymph node (arrow), a finding consistent with nodal metastasis.

Figure 18.  Lymph node involvement on a breast MR image in a
76-year-old woman presenting with palpable left axillary adenopa-
thy who had a remote history of cancer in the left breast treated
with  breast  conservation  therapy.  The  histopathologic  findings
from  fine-needle  aspiration  biopsy  were  positive  for  metastasis.
The subsequently obtained axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted
MR image shows mediastinal lymphadenopathy (solid arrows) and
contralateral internal mammary chain lymphadenopathy (dashed
arrow). No breast lesion was found.

Staging Considerations
on Breast MR Images

Skin
Breast cancer involvement of the skin increases
the stage of the disease and precludes surgical
options with favorable cosmetic results, such as
nipple-sparing or skin-sparing mastectomy. Focal
skin ulceration or a nodule that is found at clinical
examination and is substantiated by direct exten-
sion of enhancing tumor to the skin on breast MR
images (Fig 20), which is confirmed by the results
of a skin punch biopsy, constitutes T4 (at least stage
IIIB) disease and carries a poor prognosis (32),
with a reported median survival of 43 months (15).
In contrast, diffuse skin thickening and abnormal
enhancement on breast MR images, often with an
underlying mass, correlates with peau d’orange at
clinical examination (Fig 21) and represents inflam-
matory breast cancer with diffuse dermal lymphatic
plugging by tumor emboli, which is classified as at
least stage IIIB disease (32). Focal enhancing der-
mal lesions on breast MR images most commonly
represent incidental benign lesions such as seba-
ceous or epidermal inclusion cysts. However, in a
patient with a prior history of breast cancer, the skin
is occasionally the site of metastasis or recurrence
of disease and requires careful evaluation on MR

images. New or enlarging focal nodular enhancing
skin lesions, particularly 1.5–2 years after breast
conservation therapy with radiation therapy, are
suspicious in the setting of breast cancer or mela-
noma (Fig 22) (38) and require histologic evalua-
tion. In contrast, benign posttreatment changes in
the skin are typically more diffuse and smooth areas
of enhancement or thickening (39).

Chest Wall
Breast MR imaging is highly sensitive in detect-
ing posterior tumor extension to the pectoralis
and chest wall muscles, which is depicted as
abnormal enhancement within the substance of
the muscles. Although disease involvement of
the pectoralis major or minor muscles does not
equate to chest wall invasion and does not alter
clinical staging, this observation is important to
make on breast MR images, because it offers a
clear understanding of the full disease extent and
guides surgical planning. A patient with breast
cancer involving the pectoralis muscle would
undergo a radical mastectomy, removing the
breast as well as the pectoralis major and minor
muscles (Fig 23). In contrast, chest wall invasion
is defined as tumor involvement of the serratus
anterior and intercostal muscles, as well as the
ribs. Chest wall invasion on breast MR images
indicates stage IIIB disease, regardless of the

24

January-February 2017

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 19.  Lymph node involvement on a surveillance breast
MR  image  in  a  55-year-old  woman  with  a  history  of  bilateral
breast cancer diagnosed 7 years previously. (a) Axial contrast-
enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows a single enlarged right
interpectoral  lymph  node  (arrow).  (b)  Subsequent  coronal
dual-modality  fluorine  18  fluorodeoxyglucose  (FDG)  positron
emission tomography (PET)/CT image shows that the enlarged
lymph  node  (arrow)  is  FDG  avid,  a  finding  consistent  with  a
metastatic Rotter node.

Figure 20.  Skin involvement on the breast MR image in a 32-year-old BRCA2-positive woman with cancer of the left breast that was
found  with  palpation.  (a)  Axial  contrast-enhanced  T1-weighted  MR  image  shows  the  known  cancer  with  abnormal  enhancement
extending into the dermis (arrow). (b) Axial US image shows a corresponding irregular mass (arrow) in the periareolar area of the left
breast, with direct dermal invasion.

primary tumor size (32) (Fig 24), and usually
warrants neoadjuvant chemotherapy because a
negative surgical margin could not be obtained in
this setting.

Other Clinically Important
Considerations on Breast MR Images

Cardiovascular Structures

Heart.—The heart is consistently imaged on
contrast-enhanced breast MR images. Cardiac
conditions incidentally noted on breast MR im-
ages should be described, particularly in a patient

who will be undergoing chemotherapy for breast
cancer, which can be highly cardiotoxic (eg, doxo-
rubicin therapy). The cardiac size is easily assessed
on breast MR images by using a cardiothoracic
ratio derived from the width of the heart divided
by the width of the chest span. As on a chest
radiograph or CT image, a cardiothoracic ratio
greater than 0.5 is suggestive of cardiomegaly (Fig
25a) (40,41). Similarly, disproportionate enlarge-
ment of one or two cardiac chambers is suggestive
of cardiomegaly or cardiomyopathy (Fig 25a). Sec-
ondary signs of a cardiac abnormality on breast
MR images, such as valve replacement (Fig 25a)
or a prior sternotomy (Fig 25b), should direct

RG  •  Volume 37  Number 1

Gao et al  25

Figure  21.  Skin  involvement  on  a
breast  MR  image  in  a  46-year-old
woman with cancer of the left breast.
Axial  contrast-enhanced  T1-weighted
MR  image  shows  diffuse  abnormal
dermal  thickening  and  enhancement
(arrows)  involving  the  left  breast,  a
finding  that  corresponded  to  peau
d’orange  observed  at  the  clinical  ex-
amination. The underlying carcinoma
in the left breast is not shown to best
advantage here.

Figure  22.  Skin  involvement  on  a  breast  MR  image  in  a
50-year-old woman presenting with a palpable skin lesion on
the  left  side,  who  had  undergone  fine-needle  aspiration  bi-
opsy (FNAB) of the lesion guided by palpation, with the results
pending. The patient had a history of cancer of the left breast
diagnosed  2  years  previously.  Axial  contrast-enhanced  T1-
weighted fat-saturated MR image shows a new enhancing skin
lesion (arrow), which was later diagnosed as a skin metastasis
or recurrence on the basis of the findings from FNAB.

attention to the heart. Rarely, the orientation of
the heart is abnormal. The cardiac apex pointing
to the right constitutes dextrocardia, a condition
found in 0.2% of the population (42). Approxi-
mately 27% of those with dextrocardia have asso-
ciated situs inversus, with a complete mirror-image
reversal of the normal anatomic configuration (Fig
26b) (43).

Great Vessels.—The thoracic aorta and great
vessels are included in the field of view on breast
MR images. Although acute or subacute abnor-
malities such as aortic dissection or aneurysms
are rarely depicted on breast MR images, the
entire extent of the imaged thoracic aorta should
be carefully assessed, particularly on the sagit-
tal projection, where this vessel is often imaged
to the greatest extent. Developmental anomalies
involving the great vessels arising from the aortic
arch are occasionally seen on breast MR images,
some of which may be symptomatic and previ-
ously undiagnosed (Fig 27). In particular, an
aberrant right subclavian artery occurs in ap-
proximately 1% of the population, with the right
subclavian artery arising as the last branch of the

Figure 23.  Chest wall involvement on a breast MR image in
a 70-year-old woman with newly diagnosed cancer of the left
breast. Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows
markedly abnormal enhancement (arrow) involving nearly the
entire extent of the left pectoralis major muscle.

aortic arch and taking a retroesophageal course
80% of the time, which causes the so-called
dysphagia lusoria (44) (Fig 27). In comparison, a
right aortic arch is an even less-common con-
genital anomaly that occurs in less than 0.1%
of the population (Fig 26a). Most patients with
right aortic arch, however, are asymptomatic.
Right aortic arch with an aberrant left subcla-
vian artery with a retroesophageal course may be
symptomatic, particularly when a vascular ring
is formed with the ligamentum arteriosum. This
combination is rarely associated with congenital
cardiac conditions (44). In contrast, a right aortic
arch with mirror-image branching (in order of
left innominate artery, right carotid artery, and
right subclavian arteries) is almost always associ-
ated with congenital heart disease and manifests
early in life. Consistently inspecting the vascular
structures in their course and caliber will help
identify rare but clinically important findings on
breast MR images.

26

January-February 2017

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  24.  Chest  wall  involvement  on  a
breast  MR  image  in  a  48-year-old  woman
with  cancer  of  the  left  breast.  Sagittal
contrast-enhanced  T1-weighted  MR  im-
age shows abnormal enhancement (arrow)
within  the  left  serratus  anterior  and  inter-
costal  muscles,  a  finding  consistent  with
chest wall invasion.

Figure 25.
Incidental cardiac findings on breast MR images in two patients. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted
MR image of a 72-year-old woman with newly diagnosed breast cancer shows severe cardiomegaly with marked right
atrial enlargement (short solid arrows), a sequela of previous rheumatic disease. Note susceptibility artifacts (dashed ar-
row) caused by a prosthetic mitral valve. Incidentally, a large hiatal hernia (long solid arrows) is depicted in the retrocar-
diac location. (b) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image of a 68-year-old woman shows susceptibility artifacts
(arrow) caused by the wire from a previous sternotomy, a finding indicating a history of cardiac pathologic conditions.

Figure 26.
Incidental cardiac findings on breast MR images in two patients. (a) Axial screening contrast-enhanced
T1-weighted MR image of a 37-year-old woman shows an incidental finding of a right aortic arch (arrows). (b) Axial
contrast-enhanced  T1-weighted  fat-saturated  MR  image  of  a  46-year-old  woman  shows  incidental  findings  of  dex-
trocardia (white arrow) and a centralized descending aorta (black arrow), as well as a left-sided liver and right-sided
stomach and spleen, findings consistent with situs inversus that were also depicted at CT (CT images not shown).

RG  •  Volume 37  Number 1

Gao et al  27

Figure 27.
Incidental findings of a developmental anomaly involving the great vessels on screening
breast MR images in a 47-year-old BRCA2-positive woman with a family history of ovarian cancer.
(a) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows the incidental finding of a retroesopha-
geal  course  of  the  right  subclavian  artery  (arrow),  which  is  consistent  with  an  aberrant  right  sub-
clavian  artery.  (b)  Sagittal  contrast-enhanced  T1-weighted  MR  image  shows  posterior  esophageal
indentation and compression by the aberrant right subclavian artery (arrow). The clinical notes dis-
closed a patient complaint of “unexplained” intermittent nausea. The patient was referred to a gas-
trointestinal specialist for further evaluation.

gastrointestinal Structures

Common Benign Gastrointestinal Findings.—The
proximal gastrointestinal tract depicted on breast
MR images includes the esophagus, the gastro-
esophageal junction, and the stomach. Although
gastrointestinal abnormalities only account for ap-
proximately 3% of the extramammary findings on
breast MR images (2), these gastrointestinal find-
ings are often symptomatic and are therefore clini-
cally important. Hiatal hernia is the most common
incidental gastrointestinal finding on breast MR
images, depicted as superior displacement of the
gastroesophageal junction and intrathoracic hernia-
tion of the stomach through the esophageal hiatus
(Fig 5a). The normal collapsed esophagus is not
well assessed at cross-sectional imaging unless the
structure is distended with air, contrast material, or
fluid. Occasionally, a distended thickened esopha-
gus may indicate distal obstruction or narrowing
and may bring attention to the area of interest (Fig
28). The gastroesophageal junction is posterior
in location on breast MR images but should be
included in the checklist of structures to evaluate.

Unusual Malignant Involvement of the Gastro-
intestinal Tract.—The gastrointestinal tract is an
unusual location for breast cancer metastasis but
is a frequent site of spread for invasive lobular

carcinoma of the breast and hence warrants care-
ful evaluation on breast MR images. In addition
to the common sites of metastasis to the liver,
lungs, bones, and lymph nodes, invasive lobular
carcinoma has a propensity to metastasize to
locations unusual for invasive ductal carcinoma,
including the gastrointestinal tract, peritoneum,
retroperitoneum, adrenal glands, gynecologic
organs, and leptomeninges. In the results of a
study of 2605 cases of metastatic breast cancer,
investigators demonstrated that invasive lobu-
lar carcinoma metastasized significantly more
frequently (P < .05) to these sites, compared with
invasive ductal carcinoma (45). The gastrointes-
tinal tract, peritoneum, and adrenal glands are
often depicted on breast MR images and should
be carefully evaluated (Fig 29).

Systematic Approach to
Evaluating Extramammary
Structures on Breast MR Images

the Challenge
The inherent challenge is that breast MR imag-
ing is not tailored to assess structures outside
the breast. The depicted extramammary lesions
therefore may not be well characterized. MR
imaging protocols vary for different target organ
systems, in the types of coils used, the sequences

28

January-February 2017

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 28.
Incidental gastrointestinal findings on screening breast MR images in a 55-year-old woman
with a family history of breast cancer. (a) Sagittal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows a
dilated esophagus (arrows). (b) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image shows a band of low
signal intensity (arrow) around the proximal part of the stomach. (c) Axial nonenhanced CT image from
a recent previous CT examination helped confirm the presence of a lap band (arrow) around the proximal
part of the stomach.

acquired, and the timing of contrast-enhanced
imaging. Dedicated breast coils are placed close
to the breasts to maximize signal return and
therefore receive weaker signals from adjacent
structures. For that exact reason, careful as-
sessment of the extramammary structures is
necessary. Contrast bolus timing for breast MR
imaging is tailored to highlight early arterial
enhancement of breast cancer and may not
depict late-enhancing lesions in the liver, lungs,
or bones well. Thus, in the cases in which an
extramammary lesion is incompletely imaged
or evaluated on breast MR images, a dedicated
organ-specific study would be warranted. That
being said, using the available sequences for
breast MR imaging, in combination with com-
parisons with prior images, is often enough to
reach a benign diagnosis in some cases.

Systematic Approach
To best evaluate extramammary structures on
breast MR images, technical parameters must be
optimized, and the radiologist must have a sys-
tematic approach. A well-performed breast MR
imaging examination will have a high signal-
to-noise ratio and minimized motion degrada-

tion. Actively adjusting the window level while
evaluating structures outside the breast helps to
increase diagnostic sensitivity (Fig 15a, 15b).
Evaluating all projections of images allows mul-
tiplanar correlation. In addition, the radiologist
should beware of findings that are partially con-
cealed by saturation bands (Fig 30). The Ameri-
can College of Radiology Breast MR Imaging
Accreditation Program requires the following
sequences: a three-plane localizer, T2-weighted
sequence, and T1-weighted dynamic contrast-
enhanced sequences (including a nonenhanced
and an early and delayed contrast-enhanced
series) (46). The field of view is the largest on
scout images, which, although of limited resolu-
tion, should be evaluated to exclude partially
imaged abnormalities at the edge of the field of
view. It is possible that a finding may only be
depicted on the scout image and not with any
other sequences. Fluid-sensitive T2-weighted
sequences for breast MR imaging are helpful
for the characterization of focal findings. The
early-phase contrast-enhanced sequence occurs
between 1 and 2 minutes after contrast material
injection, to capture the peak enhancement of
invasive cancers. The mid to delayed contrast-

RG  •  Volume 37  Number 1

Gao et al  29

Figure  29.  Unusual  malignant  involvement  of  the  gastroin-
testinal  tract  in  a  58-year-old  woman  with  a  recent  diagnosis
of invasive lobular carcinoma who presented to the emergency
department  with  intractable  nausea  and  vomiting,  prompting
a  suspicion  of  small  bowel  obstruction.  (a)  Coronal  contrast-
enhanced CT image shows a dilated stomach, duodenum, and
proximal jejunum (arrows), findings consistent with partial small
bowel obstruction. (b, c) Axial PET/CT images obtained at differ-
ent levels show a large accumulation of malignant ascites (* on
b), as well as extensive omental studding and serosal implants
(dashed  arrows  on  c),  findings  consistent  with  peritoneal  car-
cinomatosis from metastatic invasive lobular carcinoma. Meta-
static disease was also depicted involving the left adrenal gland
(solid arrow on b) and the stomach (solid arrow on c).

enhanced sequences best overlap with the por-
tovenous phase at CT and MR body imaging,
allowing the best visceral evaluation. Ultimately,
as with any other examination, a consistent ap-
proach to evaluating extramammary structures
on breast MR images consisting of the “same
way, every time” (Fig 31) minimizes the chance
that a finding may be overlooked. Furthermore,
a systematic assessment of particularly the high-
prevalence and high-PPV organ systems for
metastasis in the bones, lungs, liver, and nodes
helps ensure that the most important findings
are consistently identified.

Conclusion
Extramammary findings on breast MR images
are most likely to be pertinent for those patients
with a new or prior diagnosis of breast cancer,
a group that accounts for more than half of the
patients undergoing breast MR imaging. Un-
derstanding the frequency and distribution of
common sites of breast cancer metastasis in the
bones, lungs, liver, and lymph nodes is helpful
in delineating important abnormalities in high-

yield (high-PPV) organ systems on breast MR
images. The emphasis on a systematic diagnostic
approach allows for consistent identification of
disease not only at the common sites of metas-
tasis, but also at less-common metastatic sites in
the gastrointestinal tract, peritoneum, and adre-
nal glands, and allows the capture of benign but
clinically important findings. Ultimately, extra-
mammary findings on breast MR images should
be interpreted in the clinical context of each
case, and the workup of these findings should be
dictated by the implications for disease staging,
treatment, and potential clinical outcomes.

Acknowledgments.—The authors wish to thank Luke Mueller,
MD, New York University, New York, NY; Vanessa Wear, MD,
Advocate  Illinois  Masonic  Medical  Center,  Chicago,  Ill;  and
Amy Melsaether, MD, New York University, New York, NY, for
contributing illustrative cases to this work.

References
  1.  Stout NK, Nekhlyudov L, Li L, et al. Rapid increase in breast
magnetic resonance imaging use: trends from 2000 to 2011.
JAMA Intern Med 2014;174(1):114–121.

  2.  Niell BL, Bennett D, Sharma A, Gazelle GS. Extramammary
findings on breast MR examinations: frequency, clinical rel-
evance, and patient outcomes. Radiology 2015;276(1):56–64.

30

January-February 2017

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 30.  Findings concealed by a saturation band on breast MR images in a 66-year-old woman of Ashkenazi descent who
had a family history of breast cancer, as well as a history of lobular carcinoma in situ in 2008. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced T1-
weighted MR image shows no obvious abnormality. Assessment was limited by a large saturation band posteriorly. (b) Axial
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR image obtained after optimizing the window level shows an exophytic enhancing right
renal mass (arrows), which later proved to be a renal cell carcinoma, for which the patient underwent right nephrectomy.

Figure 31.  Diagram shows a systematic approach to evaluating extramammary structures on breast MR images. Having an ap-
proach that is consistently used every time is key (“same way, every time”). IMC = internal mammary chain.

  3.  Alduk AM, Prutki M, Stern-Padovan R. Incidental extra-
mammary findings in breast MRI. Clin Radiol 2015;70(5):
523–527.

  4.  Rinaldi P, Costantini M, Belli P, et al. Extra-mammary find-
ings in breast MRI. Eur Radiol 2011;21(11):2268–2276.
  5.  Iodice  D,  Di  Donato  O,  Liccardo  I,  et  al.  Prevalence  of
extramammary findings on breast MRI: a large retrospec-
tive single-centre study. Radiol Med (Torino) 2013;118(7):
1109–1118.

  6.  Nguyen  J,  Nicholson  BT,  Patrie  JT,  Harvey  JA.  Incidental
pleural effusions detected on screening breast MRI. AJR Am
J Roentgenol 2012;199(1):W142–W145.

  7.  Moschetta M, Telegrafo M, Rella L, Stabile Ianora AA, Angelelli
G. Let’s go out of the breast: prevalence of extra-mammary
findings and their characterization on breast MRI. Eur J Radiol
2014;83(6):930–934.

  8.  Morakkabati-Spitz N, Sondermann E, Schmiedel A, et al.
Prevalence and type of incidental extramammary findings
in  MRI  of  the  breast  [in  German].  Rofo  2003;175(2):
199–202.

  9.  Berman AT, Thukral AD, Hwang WT, Solin LJ, Vapiwala N.
Incidence and patterns of distant metastases for patients with
early-stage breast cancer after breast conservation treatment.
Clin Breast Cancer 2013;13(2):88–94.

10.   Kennecke H, Yerushalmi R, Woods R, et al. Metastatic be-
havior of breast cancer subtypes. J Clin Oncol 2010;28(20):
3271–3277.

11.   Kamby C, Vejborg I, Kristensen B, Olsen LO, Mouridsen
HT. Metastatic pattern in recurrent breast cancer: special
reference to intrathoracic recurrences. Cancer 1988;62(10):
2226–2233.

12.   Steinauer K, Huang DJ, Eppenberger-Castori S, Amann E,
Güth U. Bone metastases in breast cancer: frequency, metastatic
pattern and non-systemic locoregional therapy. J Bone Oncol
2014;3(2):54–60.

13.   Kaltenbach  TE,  Engler  P,  Kratzer  W,  et  al.  Prevalence  of
benign focal liver lesions: ultrasound investigation of 45,319
hospital patients. Abdom Radiol (NY) 2016;41(1):25–32.
14.   Kuchuk I, Hutton B, Moretto P, Ng T, Addison CL, Clemons
M. Incidence, consequences and treatment of bone metastases

RG  •  Volume 37  Number 1

Gao et al  31

in breast cancer patients: experience from a single cancer centre.
J Bone Oncol 2013;2(4):137–144.

15.   Largillier  R,  Ferrero  JM,  Doyen  J,  et  al.  Prognostic  factors
in  1,038  women  with  metastatic  breast  cancer.  Ann  Oncol
2008;19(12):2012–2019.

16.   Chikarmane SA, Tirumani SH, Howard SA, Jagannathan JP,
DiPiro PJ. Metastatic patterns of breast cancer subtypes: what
radiologists  should  know  in  the  era  of  personalized  cancer
medicine. Clin Radiol 2015;70(1):1–10.

17.   Michaud LB. Managing cancer treatment-induced bone loss
and osteoporosis in patients with breast or prostate cancer.
Am J Health Syst Pharm 2010;67(7 suppl 3):S20–S30; quiz
S31–S33.

18.   Juozaitytė E, Aleknavičius E, Jančiauskienė R, et al. Guidelines
for diagnostics and treatment of aromatase inhibitor-induced
bone loss in women with breast cancer: a consensus of Lithu-
anian medical oncologists, radiation oncologists, endocrinolo-
gists,  and  family  medicine  physicians.  Medicina  (Kaunas)
2014;50(4):197–203.

19.   Jung  HS,  Jee  WH,  McCauley  TR,  Ha  KY,  Choi  KH.
Discrimination  of  metastatic  from  acute  osteoporotic  com-
pression  spinal  fractures  with  MR  imaging.  RadioGraphics
2003;23(1):179–187.

20.   Sung JK, Jee WH, Jung JY, et al. Differentiation of acute osteo-
porotic and malignant compression fractures of the spine: use
of additive qualitative and quantitative axial diffusion-weighted
MR imaging to conventional MR imaging at 3.0 T. Radiology
2014;271(2):488–498.

21.   Iyer R, Jhingran A. Radiation injury: imaging findings in the
chest, abdomen and pelvis after therapeutic radiation. Cancer
Imaging 2006;6:S131–S139.

22.   Yi A, Kim HH, Shin HJ, Huh MO, Ahn SD, Seo BK. Radiation-
induced complications after breast cancer radiation therapy:
a pictorial review of multimodality imaging findings. Korean
J Radiol 2009;10(5):496–507.

23.   Mortelé KJ, Ros PR. Cystic focal liver lesions in the adult:
differential  CT  and  MR  imaging  features.  RadioGraphics
2001;21(4):895–910.

24.   Khosa F, Khan AN, Eisenberg RL. Hypervascular liver lesions

on MRI. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2011;197(2):W204–W220.

25.   Lewis  KH,  Chezmar  JL.  Hepatic  metastases.  Magn  Reson

Imaging Clin N Am 1997;5(2):319–330.

26.   Fowler KJ, Brown JJ, Narra VR. Magnetic resonance imaging
of focal liver lesions: approach to imaging diagnosis. Hepatol-
ogy 2011;54(6):2227–2237.

27.   Bilici A, Ozguroglu M, Mihmanli I, Turna H, Adaletli I. A
case-control study of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in breast
cancer. Med Oncol 2007;24(4):367–371.

28.   Murata Y, Ogawa Y, Saibara T, et al. Unrecognized hepatic
steatosis and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis in adjuvant tamoxifen
for breast cancer patients. Oncol Rep 2000;7(6):1299–1304.
29.   Ocak Duran A, Yildirim A, Inanc M, et al. Hepatic steatosis is
associated with higher incidence of liver metastasis in patients
with metastatic breast cancer: an observational clinical study.
J BUON 2015;20(4):963–969.

30.   Leyendecker  JR,  Brown  JJ,  Merkel  EM.  Practical  guide  to
abdominal  and  pelvic  MRI.  2nd  ed.  Philadelphia,  Pa:  Lip-
pincott Williams & Wilkins, 2011; 243–245.

31.   Lee SL, Chang ED, Na SJ, et al. Pseudocirrhosis of breast
cancer metastases to the liver treated by chemotherapy. Cancer
Res Treat 2014;46(1):98–103.

32.   Edge S, Byrd DR, Compton CC, et al. AJCC cancer staging

manual. 7th ed. New York, NY: Springer, 2010.

33.   Hyun  SJ,  Kim  EK,  Yoon  JH,  Moon  HJ,  Kim  MJ.  Adding
MRI to ultrasound and ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspi-
ration reduces the false-negative rate of axillary lymph node
metastasis  diagnosis  in  breast  cancer  patients.  Clin  Radiol
2015;70(7):716–722.

34.   Harris EE, Hwang WT, Seyednejad F, Solin LJ. Prognosis
after regional lymph node recurrence in patients with stage
I-II breast carcinoma treated with breast conservation therapy.
Cancer 2003;98(10):2144–2151.

35.   Giuliano AE, McCall L, Beitsch P, et al. Locoregional recur-
rence  after  sentinel  lymph  node  dissection  with  or  without
axillary dissection in patients with sentinel lymph node me-
tastases: the American College of Surgeons Oncology Group
Z0011  randomized  trial.  Ann  Surg  2010;252(3):426–432;
discussion 432–433.

36.   Komenaka IK, Bauer VP, Schnabel FR, et al. Interpectoral
nodes as the initial site of recurrence in breast cancer. Arch
Surg 2004;139(2):175–178.

37.   Thomas JM, Redding WH, Sloane JP. The spread of breast
cancer: importance of the intrathoracic lymphatic route and
its relevance to treatment. Br J Cancer 1979;40(4):540–547.
38.   Kalli  S,  Freer  PE,  Rafferty  EA.  Lesions  of  the  skin  and
superficial  tissue  at  breast  MR  imaging.  RadioGraphics
2010;30(7):1891–1913.

39.   Ralleigh G, Walker AE, Hall-Craggs MA, Lakhani SR, Saunders
C. MR imaging of the skin and nipple of the breast: differentia-
tion between tumour recurrence and post-treatment change.
Eur Radiol 2001;11(9):1651–1658.

40.   Kim  YS,  Park  HJ,  Park  SH,  Chun  HJ,  Choi  BG.  A  CT
criteria  of  cardiomegaly  [in  Korean].  J  Korean  Radiol  Soc
2007;57(3):235–238.

41.   Gollub MJ, Panu N, Delaney H, et al. Shall we report car-
diomegaly  at  routine  computed  tomography  of  the  chest?  J
Comput Assist Tomogr 2012;36(1):67–71.

42.   Bernasconi  A,  Azancot  A,  Simpson  JM,  Jones  A,  Sharland
GK. Fetal dextrocardia: diagnosis and outcome in two tertiary
centres. Heart 2005;91(12):1590–1594.

43.   Comstock CH, Smith R, Lee W, Kirk JS. Right fetal cardiac
axis: clinical significance and associated findings. Obstet Gy-
necol 1998;91(4):495–499.

44.   Kau  T,  Sinzig  M,  Gasser  J,  et  al.  Aortic  development  and
anomalies. Semin Intervent Radiol 2007;24(2):141–152.
45.   Borst  MJ,  Ingold  JA.  Metastatic  patterns  of  invasive  lobu-
lar  versus  invasive  ductal  carcinoma  of  the  breast.  Surgery
1993;114(4):637–641; discussion 641–642.

46.  American College of Radiology. Breast Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI) Accreditation Program Requirements. http://
www.acraccreditation.org/~/media/ACRAccreditation/Docu-
ments/Breast-MRI/Requirements.pdf?la=en.  Updated  May
19, 2016. Accessed June 22, 2016.

This journal-based SA-CME activity has been approved for AMA PRA Category 1 CreditTM. See www.rsna.org/education/search/RG.

