This copy is for personal use only. To order printed copies, contact reprints@rsna.org

1902

Breast Cancer Tissue Markers,
Genomic Profiling, and Other
Prognostic Factors: A Primer for
Radiologists

Nikki Tirada, MD
Mireille Aujero, MD
Gauri Khorjekar, MD
Stephanie Richards, MD
Jasleen Chopra, MD
Sergio Dromi, MD
Olga Ioffe, MD

Abbreviations: AJCC = American Joint Com-
mittee on Cancer, ASCO = American Society of
Clinical  Oncology,  CEP17  =  chromosome  17,
DCIS  =  ductal  carcinoma  in  situ,  ER  =  estro-
gen receptor, HER2 = human growth hormone
receptor  2,  NCCN  =  National  Comprehensive
Cancer Network, PR = progesterone receptor

RadioGraphics 2018; 38:1902–1920

https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.2018180047

Content Codes:

From  the  Department  of  Diagnostic  Radiology
and  Nuclear  Medicine,  University  of  Maryland
School of Medicine, 22 S Greene St, Baltimore,
MD  21201.  Presented  as  an  education  exhibit
at  the  2017  RSNA  Annual  Meeting.  Received
March  2,  2018;  revision  requested April  10  and
received June 4; accepted June 6. For this journal-
based SA-CME activity, the author N.T. has pro-
vided disclosures (see end of article); all other au-
thors, the editor, and the reviewers have disclosed
no  relevant  relationships.  Address  correspon-
dence to N.T. (e-mail: pmeteesat@gmail.com).

©RSNA, 2018

SA-CME LEARninG OBjECTivES

After completing this journal-based SA-CME
activity, participants will be able to:

 ■ Discuss breast imaging findings that
may adversely affect patient prognosis
and their clinical implications.

 ■ Describe the effects of pathologic-his-
tologic grade, subtype, tumor biomark-
ers, and tumor biology on prognosis and
treatment.

 ■ Identify an individual patient’s risk of
harboring clinically silent micrometa-
static disease and determine who would
benefit from postsurgical systemic adju-
vant therapy.

See rsna.org/learning-center-rg.

An understanding of prognostic factors in breast cancer is impera-
tive for guiding patient care. Increased tumor size and more ad-
vanced nodal status are established independent prognostic factors
of poor outcomes and are incorporated into the American Joint
Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM (primary tumor, regional
lymph node, distant metastasis) staging system. However, other fac-
tors including imaging findings, histologic evaluation results, and
molecular findings can have a direct effect on a patient’s prognosis,
including risk of recurrence and relative survival. Several microar-
ray panels for gene profiling of tumors are approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration and endorsed by the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. This article highlights prognostic fac-
tors currently in use for individualizing and guiding breast cancer
therapy and is divided into four sections. The first section addresses
patient considerations, in which modifiable and nonmodifiable
prognostic factors including age, race and ethnicity, and lifestyle
factors are discussed. The second part is focused on imaging con-
siderations such as multicentric and/or multifocal disease, an exten-
sive intraductal component, and skin or chest wall involvement and
their effect on treatment and prognosis. The third section is about
histopathologic findings such as the grade and presence of lympho-
vascular invasion. Last, tumor biomarkers and tumor biology are
discussed, namely hormone receptors, proliferative markers, and
categorization of tumors into four recognized molecular subtypes
including luminal A, luminal B, human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2–enriched, and triple-negative tumors. By understand-
ing the clinical effect of these prognostic factors, radiologists, along
with a multidisciplinary team, can use these tools to achieve indi-
vidualized patient care and to improve patient outcomes.

©RSNA, 2018 • radiographics.rsna.org

introduction

Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among American
women, with a lifetime risk of 12.5% (one in eight women) for
women at average risk (1). In the United States in 2017, there were
an estimated 252 710 new diagnoses of invasive breast cancer in
women and 2470 in men, with an additional 63 410 new cases of in-
situ carcinomas in women (2). Although breast cancer screening and
advancements in breast cancer treatment have improved survival,
up to 50% of patients may experience a relapse (3). Therefore, it is
necessary to identify women at high risk of recurrence or who may
benefit from treatment with adjuvant therapy (3). Established prog-
nostic factors may help in estimation of an individual patient’s risk
of harboring clinically silent micrometastatic disease and in deter-
mination of eligibility for postsurgical systemic adjuvant therapy (4).

Breast ImagIng

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 7

Tirada et al  1903

TEAChinG POinTS
 ■ The  eighth  edition  of  the  American  Joint  Committee  on
Cancer (AJCC) TNM staging manual incorporates information
about the primary tumor size (T), regional lymph nodes (N),
and distant metastases (M); histologic grade; hormone recep-
tor  status;  Ki-67  or  other  markers  of  proliferation;  and  bio-
markers and genomic profile as prognostic factors in breast
cancer.

 ■ The ipsilateral axillary lymph node is the most common site of
involvement, and in isolation, axillary lymph node status is the
most important prognostic factor.

 ■ Four biomarkers are tested consistently in invasive breast can-
cer biopsy and excision specimens because of their potential
effect on prognosis and clinical management: ER, PR, HER2,
and Ki-67 antigen.

 ■ Approximately  75%  of  invasive  breast  carcinomas  are  hor-
mone receptor positive. These tumors tend to be lower grade
and  are  associated  with  more  indolent  behavior,  although
hormone receptor status is not known to correlate with tumor
stage. PR and particularly ER status are known to be strong
positive  predictive  factors  since  the  advent  of  targeted  hor-
mone therapy. Adjuvant endocrine therapy is associated with
a favorable treatment response in up to one-third of patients
with ER-positive tumors and also has been shown to decrease
the rate of recurrence by up to 50% in these patients

 ■ Recently, the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO)
updated  their  clinical  practice  guidelines  for  women  with
node-negative  ER-positive  early-stage  invasive  breast  cancer
to  include  the  use  of  biomarker  tests  including  Oncotype
DX,  MammaPrint,  Endopredict  (Myriad  Genetics,  Zurich,
Switzerland),  and  Prosigna  PAM50  risk  of  recurrence  score
(nanoString, Seattle, Wash) to help predict whether patients
will benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy.

Prognostic factors serve three primary functions
in patient treatment: (a) identification of pa-
tients whose prognosis is excellent and for whom
adjuvant therapy after local surgery would not
be cost-effective or would not change prognosis
substantially, (b) identification of patients whose
prognosis is poor and who warrant a more ag-
gressive adjuvant approach, and (c) identification
of patients likely to be responsive or resistant to
particular forms of therapy (5).

The eighth edition of the American Joint
Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM staging
manual incorporates information about the
primary tumor size (T), regional lymph nodes
(N), and distant metastases (M); histologic
grade; hormone receptor status; Ki-67 or other
markers of proliferation; and biomarkers and
genomic profiles as prognostic factors in breast
cancer (6). As members of multidisciplinary
breast cancer treatment teams, breast radiolo-
gists must be familiar with biomarker testing in
addition to the distinct breast cancer subtypes
and their prognostic and therapeutic implica-
tions. Further understanding of molecular ge-
netics also is essential in moving toward person-
alized breast cancer care. This article explains

in depth the utility of prognostic factors in the
management of nonmetastatic breast cancers.
These include early breast cancer or stage I to
IIB (up to T2N1), and locally advanced disease
or stage IIB (T3N0) to IIIC.

Patient Considerations

Age
Generally, the course of breast cancer is consid-
ered to be unfavorable in very young and very
old patients. Very young patients with breast can-
cer (younger than 35 years) usually present at a
later stage with estrogen receptor (ER)–negative
status, and aggressive tumor biology, which leads
to shorter time to local-regional recurrence, a
shorter distant disease–free interval, and poorer
overall survival (Fig 1) (7,8). Patients older than
65 years have lower relative survival rates be-
cause their disease is diagnosed at a later stage,
and they are more likely to have comorbidities
and treatment discrepancies (9). Women aged
45–49 years have the best prognosis (9). The ef-
fect of age also depends on breast cancer sub-
types. Age may be of greater prognostic impor-
tance in luminal cancers than in other types of
breast cancer. Younger patients with ER-positive
tumors have poorer disease-free survival than do
patients with ER-negative tumors, but in older
patients, the disease-free survival rate is similar
regardless of ER status (10). In patients with
human growth hormone receptor 2 (HER2)–
positive breast cancer, age is not associated with
early relapse or survival, with or without treat-
ment with trastuzumab (11).

Race and Ethnicity
Racial disparities in breast cancer outcomes
have multiple causes (12). African American
women of lower socioeconomic status present
with fewer screening-detected cancers and have
delays between diagnosis and initiation of treat-
ment (12). Despite the lower incidence of breast
cancer in African American women compared
with that in white women, the mortality rate for
African American women is higher (29.2 vs 20.6
deaths per 100 000 women, respectively) (1,12).
This is related in part to the predisposition to
biologically aggressive triple-negative tumors with
basal-like subtypes, greater intratumoral genetic
heterogeneity, and low pathologic complete
response for triple-negative and HER2-positive
tumors after African American women receive
neoadjuvant chemotherapy (12,13).

Lifestyle Factors
Smoking increases the risk for development of
breast cancer, with risk dictated by the number of

1904  November-December 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 1.  Triple-negative invasive ductal carcinoma in a 29-year-old white woman with multiple adverse prognostic factors includ-
ing young age, Nottingham grade 3, Ki-67 proliferation rate of 86%, an axillary lymph node positive for cancer, lack of response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and lymphovascular invasion. (a, b) Initial US images acquired before neoadjuvant chemotherapy show
a 2.9-cm mass in the right breast at the 9-o’clock position (a) and a 1.9-cm abnormal right axillary lymph node (b). (c, d) Follow-up
images to assess response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy obtained 2 months after initial diagnosis show interval enlargement of cancer
in the right breast and lymph node, measuring 4.5 cm (c) and 3 cm (d), respectively. (e) Photomicrograph (hematoxylin-eosin stain;
original magnification, 310) shows lymphovascular invasion (arrow) near the edge of the tumor and invasive ductal carcinoma (*) in
the background. (f) PET/CT image acquired 10 months later, after the patient had undergone surgery, shows diffuse metastatic disease.

pack-years of smoking history and age of initia-
tion (14). Patients who smoke before and after a
diagnosis of breast cancer also have higher mor-
tality rates. Smoking cessation has been shown
to improve breast cancer outcomes (14), and
patients should be advised to quit smoking.

Obesity is another important consideration.
Excess weight (body mass index >30 kg/m2) has
a negative prognostic effect in patients with breast
cancer (15). Obesity is associated with older age at
diagnosis, advanced stage, and triple-negative status
(15–17). However, unlike smoking cessation, weight
loss does not lead to increased survival (15–17).
Therefore, additional research is necessary (16).

imaging Considerations

Screening-detected Breast Cancer
Screening mammography has been shown in
randomized controlled trials (18,19) to reduce
breast cancer mortality by 30%–50%. This benefit
is largely attributed to earlier-stage detection of
breast cancers compared with those detected at

clinical examinations (20–22). The prognosis is
particularly excellent if the diagnosis is ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS). Up to 90% of clinically
occult DCIS manifests as microcalcifications seen
on mammograms (23). The estimated 20-year
mortality rate for DCIS is 3.3%, while the esti-
mated 10-year mortality rate is 23.2% for clinically
detected breast cancer and 20.9% for interval
breast cancer, or cancer detected between routine
screening mammographic examinations (24,25).

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 7

Tirada et al  1905

Breast Density
Breast density is a known independent risk factor
for breast cancer, with a four- to five-fold in-
creased relative risk for breast cancer in women
with dense breasts (26). The overlapping dense
parenchyma may obscure small masses or lower
the sensitivity of mammography, leading to a
delay in diagnosis (27). Breast cancers arising in
women with dense breasts tend to be larger, have
a higher histologic tumor grade, and more often
manifest with positive lymph node status and
lymphovascular invasion (28–30). However, it is
ambiguous if having dense breasts is an inde-
pendent mortality risk factor once the diagnosis
of breast cancer is made. Results of the Swedish
mammographic screening trial (31) showed that
women with dense breasts have a 1.91 relative
risk for breast cancer mortality after controlling
for other factors such as age, body mass index,
tumor size, histologic tumor grade, and nodal
status. However, additional studies (26,32) with a
comparable number of patients showed that high
breast density does not lead to increased mortal-
ity after controlling for confounding factors.

Tumor Size
Tumor size was one of the earliest recognized
independent prognostic factors. The size of the
tumor can be determined with a combination
of radiologic, gross pathologic, and microscopic
findings. The largest measurement of an invasive
component without an adjacent in-situ compo-
nent is used to determine T staging. If there is
multifocal disease (additional cancer seen in the
same quadrant) or multicentric disease (addi-
tional cancer seen in different quadrants), only
the largest diameter of the largest mass is used
to determine T staging. Carter et al (33) showed
that larger tumors have a higher likelihood of
nodal involvement and worse outcomes, with
91%, 80%, and 63% 5-year overall survival for
T1, T2, and T3 tumors, respectively. Given simi-
lar lymph node status, a 1-mm increase in tumor
size resulted in a 1% decrease in the 15-year sur-
vival rate (34). T4 staging is reserved for tumors
of any size with direct extension to the chest wall
(T4a), to the skin (T4b), or both (T4c).

Multifocal and Multicentric Disease
Studies (35–37) show that patients with multifo-
cal or multicentric disease have worse disease-free
survival rates and higher rates of locally recurrent
and metastatic disease. Lynch et al (36) suggested
that this may be secondary to larger tumor size,
higher histopathologic grade, lymphovascular inva-
sion, and lymph node involvement in patients with
multifocal and/or multicentric disease compared
with patients with unifocal disease. However,

whether a multifocal and/or multicentric tumor is
an independent prognostic factor is controversial
and currently not considered a part of the TNM
staging system (Fig 2).

Extensive intraductal Component
Invasive carcinoma is considered to have an exten-
sive intraductal component if intraductal foci or
DCIS constitute more than 25% of the adjacent
breast tissue separate from the main tumor mass
(38) (Fig 3). Although the final diagnosis of an
extensive intraductal component is determined
on the basis of pathologic examination, imaging
findings such as a mass with associated segmental
microcalcifications on a mammogram (Fig 3a, 3b)
or clumped nonmass enhancement on breast MR
images (Fig 3d) can help in surgical planning to
ensure negative margins (39). Achieving nega-
tive resection margins decreases the risk of local
recurrence in the surgical bed, while incomplete
resection of an extensive intraductal component
results in higher risk of local recurrence but does
not increase the risk for a new primary cancer in
the ipsilateral or contralateral breast or of distant
metastatic disease (38,40).

Skin and Chest Wall involvement
Local extension to the skin or the chest wall is
classified as T4 or at least stage IIIB regardless of
tumor size (6). For T4a, the tumor must invade
beyond the pectoralis muscles into the chest wall
(defined as the ribs, intercostal muscles, and ser-
ratus anterior muscle) (6). For T4b, skin involve-
ment must extend beyond the dermis but not
meet criteria for inflammatory breast cancer (Figs
2, 4) (6). However, direct skin invasion may not
imply a worse outcome. Authors of several studies
(41–44) demonstrated that skin invasion has no
substantial effect on prognosis when the research-
ers controlled for tumor size and nodal status. Sil-
verman et al (42) showed that the adjusted 5-year
disease-specific survival for stage I-II (based on
tumor size and lymph node status only) are similar
with or without skin invasion (42).

inflammatory Breast Cancer
For diagnosis of inflammatory breast cancer
(stage T4d), in addition to pathologic diagnosis of
invasive breast carcinoma, the patient must pres-
ent with rapid onset or less than 6 months of skin
erythema or peau d’orange that occupies at least
one-third of the breast (Fig 5) (6). Although sur-
vival has improved with neoadjuvant chemother-
apy, surgery, and radiation therapy, the prognosis
remains poor, with a 5-year overall survival rate of
30%–70% (45–49). Triple-negative receptor status
(ER, PR, and HER2), lymph node and/or chest
wall involvement, age older than 50 years, and lack

1906  November-December 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  2.  Multicentric  lobular  carcinoma  (stage  T4bN1M0,  Nottingham  grade  3,  ER  positive,  proges-
terone receptor [PR] positive, HER2 negative, and 13% Ki-67) in a 47-year-old woman. (a) Exaggerated
craniocaudal full-field digital mammogram of the right breast shows multicentric breast cancer, with the
largest mass measuring 4.1 cm in the retroareolar region (red oval in a and b) and smaller masses at 12
o’clock (white arrows in a and b). (b) Exaggerated craniocaudal contrast-enhanced digital subtraction MR
image shows direct extension of the subareolar mass into the inverted right nipple and additional smaller
masses at 2 o’clock (yellow arrows). Staging of multicentric disease is based on the size of the largest mass.

of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy are poor
prognostic factors for inflammatory breast cancer
(48–51). Results of some studies (52) suggest that
an accelerated or high radiation dose may improve
local-regional control in patients with close or
positive margins or suboptimal response to neoad-
juvant chemotherapy treatment.

nodal involvement
The N stage is determined according to the size
of nodal metastatic deposits, and the num-
ber and location of involved lymph nodes (6).
The ipsilateral axillary lymph node is the most
common site of involvement, and in isolation,
axillary lymph node status is the most important
prognostic factor (53,54). A study of 24 740
women in which Carter et al (33) used the
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
(SEER) program database showed that 5-year
overall survival decreases by approximately
14% if there is lymph node involvement. Given
the same disease stage, there is an estimated
additional 6% risk of death with each positive
lymph node (34). However, the prognosis is not
as straightforward when the clinically negative
lymph node has an isolated tumor cell (<0.2
mm) or micrometastases (<2 mm) (Fig 6). Au-
thors of some studies (55,56) suggest that over-

all survival is not affected by the isolated tumor
cell but is slightly decreased if there are micro-
metastases. Positive intramammary lymph nodes
and internal mammary chain lymph nodes have
similar negative prognostic value to that of axil-
lary lymph node metastasis (Fig 7) (57,58). The
American College of Surgeons Oncology Group
Z0010 trial (59) and the National Surgical Ad-
juvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) B-32
trial (60) showed that occult metastatic disease
may increase the risk for disease recurrence but
may not affect overall survival.

Peritumoral Lymphovascular invasion
Peritumoral lymphovascular invasion currently
is not considered part of the TNM staging sys-
tem but is a negative prognostic factor (53). In
particular, lymphovascular invasion is associated
with larger tumor size, higher histologic grade,
lymph node involvement, and ER-negative sta-
tus (Fig 1e). Although lymphovascular invasion
is confirmed at pathologic examination, imaging
findings such as increased peritumoral edema,
increased intratumoral T2 signal intensity, in-
creased ipsilateral whole-breast vascularity, and
a higher peritumor to tumor apparent diffusion
coefficient ratio can suggest lymphovascular
invasion (61,62).

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 7

Tirada et al  1907

Figure 3.
Invasive micropapillary carcinoma (stage T1cN0M0, Nottingham grade 2, ER positive, PR positive, HER2 negative, 12% Ki-67)
with extensive DCIS and an intraductal component in a 47-year-old black woman.(a, b) Mediolateral oblique mammographic view (a)
and spot magnification mediolateral view (b) of the right breast show segmental pleomorphic calcifications extending from the pos-
terior depth to the nipple, involving the entire upper outer quadrant (red oval). (c) Targeted right breast US image from an examina-
tion performed to evaluate a retroareolar palpable area of concern indicated by the patient shows a dilated duct containing echogenic
foci (red arrows), confirming extension into the nipple. (d) Contrast-enhanced three-dimensional T1-weighted maximum intensity
projection MR image of the breasts shows a segmental area of clumped nonmass enhancement. (e) Photomicrograph (hematoxylin-
eosin stain; original magnification, 32) shows nipple involvement in invasive ductal carcinoma (*) and tumor cells within lymphatic
vessels in the dermis (arrows). (f) Photomicrograph (hematoxylin-eosin stain; original magnification, 320) shows DCIS, with the duct
filled with highly atypical cells with prominent nucleoli and central necrosis. Myoepithelial cells are present at the periphery without
invasion beyond the basement membrane.

1908  November-December 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 4.
Invasive ductal carcinoma (stage T2bN1M0, Nottingham grade 3, ER positive, PR positive, HER2 positive, 42% Ki-67) of
the right breast in a 55-year-old woman. (a) Sagittal contrast-enhanced T1-weighted breast MR image shows direct extension of the
cancer into the skin (red arrow) and susceptibility artifact from the biopsy clip (*). (b) Photomicrograph (hematoxylin-eosin stain;
original magnification, 32) shows skin with dermal involvement without extension to the epidermis or visible ulceration (hence, not
T4b) of invasive ductal carcinoma (arrow). Negative margins were achieved at lumpectomy.

Tumoral necrosis
Tumoral necrosis is a recognized adverse patho-
logic feature and can be seen as cystic or non-
enhancing areas on images (Fig 8). It is often
associated with other poor prognostic findings
in patients with invasive breast cancer such
as younger patient age, larger tumor size, and
lymphovascular invasion (63). DCIS with central
necrosis or comedonecrosis is associated with
earlier disease recurrence (Fig 3f) (64). Fur-
thermore, a subset of breast cancers with central
necrosis and fibrosis are related to the basal-like
molecular subtype and have a higher rate of lung
and brain metastasis and lower rate of 5-year
disease-free survival (70% vs 84% of patients
with and without necrotic and fibrotic tissue,
respectively) (65). One exception is medullary
carcinoma, which has a superior prognosis com-
pared with other triple-negative subtypes (66).

Additional imaging Workup
According to the American College of Radiology
(67) appropriateness criteria, additional imag-
ing workup such as fluorodeoxyglucose PET/
CT, technetium 99m bone scanning, and CT of
the chest, abdomen, and pelvis usually are not
appropriate for evaluation of early breast cancer.
The National Comprehensive Cancer Network
(NCCN) guideline recommends staging studies
in patients diagnosed with stage IIIA and higher
cancers, greater than four positive axillary
nodes, and recurrent or inflammatory breast
cancer (68). However, breast MRI may be ap-

propriate in selected patients with early breast
cancer such as those who have mammographic
or US findings suggestive of multifocal and/or
multicentric disease and those suspected of hav-
ing chest wall involvement or a high-risk subtype
of cancer (67,69).

Pathologic Evaluation Considerations

histologic Tumor Grade
Histologic tumor grade is an important prognostic
factor, with higher tumor grade generally portend-
ing a worse prognosis (6,70). Pathologists assess
the grade of breast cancers by using the Notting-
ham Histologic Score System (the Elston-Ellis
[71] modification of the Scarff-Bloom-Richardson
grading system), which allows objective scoring of
tumors on the basis of three characteristics: tubule
formation (or glandular differentiation), nuclear
features, and mitotic activity (Fig 9). Tumors are
scored on a three-point scale in each of the three
categories, and the scores are added for a total of
up to nine points. Tumors with a score of 1 for tu-
bule formation have glands in greater than 75% of
the tissue and exhibit better differentiation, those
with a score of 2 have glands in 10%–75% of the
tissue, and those with a score of 3 have glands in
less than 10% of the tissue (6,71). Scoring nuclear
pleomorphism is arguably the most subjective
aspect of the Nottingham system, incorporating
features such as nuclear size and prominence of
nucleoli. Tumors that are given a score of 1 gener-
ally have small regular nuclei with rare nucleoli.

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 7

Tirada et al  1909

Figure 5.
Inflammatory breast cancer (stage T4dN2M0, Nottingham grade 2, ER negative, PR negative, HER2 negative fluorescence
in situ hybridization, 1.8 HER2 to chromosome 17 [CEP17] ratio, 64% Ki-67) in a 66-year-old woman who presented with worsening left
breast edema for 4 months. Her symptoms improved but did not resolve with antibiotics. US-guided core biopsy of the dominant mass (*
in a and b) at the 11-o’clock position posterior depth showed invasive lobular carcinoma. (a, b) Mediolateral oblique mammogram (a)
and  sagittal  T1-weighted  fat-saturated  postcontrast  MR  image  (b)  of  the  left  breast  show  skin  thickening  involving  more  than
one-third of the breast (arrows), two irregular masses, and enlarged left axillary lymph nodes (red oval). (c) Low-power photomi-
crograph (hematoxylin-eosin stain; original magnification, 34) shows tumor cells within lymphatic vessels in the dermis (arrows).
(d) Photomicrograph (hematoxylin-eosin stain; original magnification, 34; ) shows a lymph node almost entirely replaced by lobular
carcinoma, with tumor cells extending into the perinodal adipose tissue (arrow).

Score 2 tumors have larger and mildly pleomor-
phic nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli, and score
3 tumors have markedly enlarged and often bizarre
nuclear features with prominent nucleoli (6,53).
Mitotic activity is scored on the basis of a count of
mitotic figures in 10 high-powered fields; the exact
scoring is dependent on microscopic field diameter
but follows the principle that more mitoses are
found in higher-grade tumors. Total scores of 3–5
indicate a low-grade tumor (grade 1), while a score
of 8–9 corresponds to a high-grade tumor (grade

3) with aggressive features likely (53). The eighth
edition of the AJCC TNM staging manual incor-
porates histologic grades into a clinical prognostic
stage and pathologic prognostic stage.

Histologic Subtype
To some extent, histologic type also has a role in
determining breast cancer prognosis. Because of
their tendency to occur multifocally with a single-
cell infiltrative pattern, invasive lobular carcinomas
tend to manifest at a higher overall stage with

1910  November-December 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  6.  (a)  Photomicrograph  (hematoxylin-eosin  stain;  original  magnification,
320) shows micrometastases in the sentinel lymph node (N1mi) with a 1-mm cluster
of tumor cells (invasive ductal carcinoma) in the subcapsular region of a lymph node.
(b)  Corresponding  photomicrograph  (pancytokeratin  immunohistochemical  stain;
original magnification, 320) highlights tumor cells.

Figure 7.  Solid papillary carcinoma (stage T1cN1M0, Nottingham grade 1, ER positive, PR positive, HER2 negative, 5% Ki-
67) in a 66-year-old black woman. (a) US image in the right breast shows a 1.6-cm hypoechoic mass possibly associated with
a duct in the right breast. (b) Color-coded map of contrast-enhanced T1-weighted maximum intensity projection breast MR
image shows the known cancer (arrow) and intramammary lymph node with biopsy-proven metastatic carcinoma (circle). The
intramammary lymph node is designated as an axillary lymph node for staging purposes. The patient had a good prognosis,
given the low histologic grade and type of tumor. Her receptor markers were also favorable.

frequent lymph node metastases (53). Although
there are conflicting reports of the short-term
prognostic differences between invasive ductal car-
cinomas and invasive lobular carcinomas, invasive
lobular carcinomas appear to show higher rates
of relapse and bone metastasis in the long term
(66). This may be, in part, because invasive lobular
carcinomas tend to be ER positive, a type that has
a lower recurrence rate in the initial year compared
with that of the ER-negative type, but the trend
is reversed in later years (66). Various subtypes
of invasive ductal carcinoma also have prognostic
implications. Usually well-differentiated breast
cancers such as tubular and mucinous carcinomas
have a favorable prognosis, while less-differentiated

breast cancers such as metaplastic and micropapil-
lary carcinomas tend to have worse outcomes.

Biomarker Considerations
Four biomarkers are tested consistently in inva-
sive breast cancer biopsy and excision specimens
because of their potential effect on prognosis and
clinical management: ER, PR, HER2, and Ki-67
antigen (Fig 10).

Estrogen and Progesterone Receptors
ER is an estrogen-activated nuclear transcrip-
tion factor that regulates the development and
proliferation of breast tissue, both benign and
neoplastic (72). Similarly, PR is also a nuclear

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 7

Tirada et al  1911

Figure 8.  Palpable medullary carcinoma (stage T2N0M0, ER negative, PR negative, HER2 negative, 52%
Ki-67) in the right breast in a 30-year-old black woman. (a) US image shows a 4.3-cm complex cystic and
solid mass. (b) CT image shows a solid component. Despite tumoral necrosis, this patient’s prognosis was
better than that for the patient in Figure 1 (who also showed triple-negative breast cancer) because of dif-
ferentiated medullary histologic subtype, negative lymph nodes, and no lymphovascular invasion.

transcription factor and is a component of the
ER pathway (53). The majority of tumors that
express ER also express PR, and most ER-nega-
tive tumors also lack PR expression (53). There
is debate as to whether ER-positive PR-negative
tumors are a true entity, although there is some
evidence that these tumors may represent a more
aggressive subtype of ER-positive tumors (53).
Generally, ER and PR status are considered

together as hormone receptor status. Approxi-
mately 75% of invasive breast carcinomas are
hormone receptor positive (53). These tumors
tend to be lower grade and are associated with
more indolent behavior, although hormone
receptor status is not known to correlate with tu-
mor stage (53,72). PR and particularly ER status
are known to be strong positive predictive factors
since the advent of targeted hormone therapy.
Adjuvant endocrine therapy is associated with a
favorable treatment response in up to one-third
of patients with ER-positive tumors and also has
been shown to decrease the rate of recurrence by
up to 50% in these patients (49,53,73).

Although molecular assays for ER and PR are
currently available, hormone receptor status is most
commonly determined with immunohistochemical
staining on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tis-
sue in the pathology laboratory. They are generally
scored as a percentage or range of percentages of
nuclear positivity, with greater than or equal to 1%
as the cutoff value for positivity (74). The average
intensity of nuclear ER and PR staining is generally
reported as weak, moderate, or strong (72).

human Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor 2
The ERB-B2 gene encodes HER2, which is a
growth factor receptor found in both normal and
neoplastic breast cells (53). The gene is amplified

with resulting HER2 protein overexpression in ap-
proximately 20% of invasive breast cancers, leading
to increased tumor growth (72). Breast cancers that
overexpress HER2 are generally more aggressive,
being associated with high rates of metastasis and
decreased overall survival in the absence of treat-
ment (72). It is important to assess invasive breast
carcinoma for HER2 status, because treatment
with targeted therapies (ie, trastuzumab) has been
shown to improve overall and disease-free survival
in some patients with HER2-positive tumors (75).
HER2 overexpression also has been associated with
resistance to hormonal modulation (72).

HER2 testing in the laboratory typically
begins with immunohistochemical staining of
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. It is
given a score ranging from 0 to 3+ on the basis
of the amount and intensity of membranous
staining (Fig 11). A score of 3+ is considered
HER2 positive at immunohistochemical analy-
sis, while tumors with scores of 1+ and 0 are
considered to be HER2 negative. A score of 2+
is considered to be equivocal and warrants fur-
ther testing with in situ hybridization (76).

Although immunohistochemical staining tar-
gets the HER2 protein on the cell membrane, in
situ hybridization is a technique whereby a probe
is used to locate, in the case of HER2, a target
DNA sequence corresponding to the ERB-B2
gene. It is useful when immunohistochemical re-
sults are equivocal, because in situ hybridization is
reported as either a copy number of the ERB-B2
gene present in each cancer cell or a ratio of the
ERB-B2 gene copies to CEP17 (HER2/CEP17
ratio) to determine if there truly is amplifica-
tion of HER2 (Fig 12) (76). Fluorescence in situ
hybridization is the criterion standard for in situ
hybridization, but it requires special fluorescence
microscopes and software for interpretation (77).

1912  November-December 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure 9.  Photomicrographs (hematoxylin-eosin stain; original magnification, 310–20 [various]) show varying Nottingham grades
for nuclear, tubule, and mitosis scores: nuclear score 1, small nuclei with uniform round shapes (a); nuclear score 2, small to medium-
sized nuclei with some shape irregularity (b); nuclear score 3, large pleomorphic and vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli (c);
tubule score 1, greater than 75% tubule formation (d); tubule score 2, 10%–75% tubule formation (e); tubule score 3, less than 10%
tubule formation (f); mitosis score 1, low mitotic rate with mitoses present (g); mitosis score 2, medium mitotic rate with one mitosis
(arrow) (h); and mitosis score 3, high mitotic rate with four mitoses (arrows) (i).

Techniques such as chromogenic in situ hybrid-
ization and silver-enhanced in situ hybridization
have emerged; they rely on standard light micros-
copy for interpretation, combining the techniques
of immunohistochemical staining and in situ
hybridization (77). These nonfluorescence in situ
hybridization methods correlate well with immu-
nohistochemical and fluorescence in situ hybrid-
ization results and are useful when fluorescence
in situ hybridization is not available (77).

Ki-67
Ki-67 is a nuclear protein involved in cell prolifera-
tion. Because uncontrolled proliferation is a hall-
mark of malignancy, Ki-67 expression commonly is
tested in patients with breast cancer. Its prognostic
and predictive importance is somewhat uncertain,
although a higher proliferative rate generally is
considered to be unfavorable (78,79). For stratifica-
tion of breast cancers according to their intrinsic
molecular subtypes, Ki-67 immunohistochemical

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 7

Tirada et al  1913

Figure 10.  Photomicrographs with immunohistochemical staining (original magnification, 310–20 [various]) show various levels
of ER, PR, and HER2 staining intensity: ER nuclear stain at 0% (a), 24% (b), and 100% (c); PR nuclear stain at 0% (d), 11% (e), and
100% (f); and HER2 membranous stain at 1+ (negative) (g), 2+ (borderline) (h), and 3+ (overexpressed) (i).

staining can be used to differentiate luminal A
from luminal B tumors, because luminal B tumors
have a higher proliferation rate (Fig 13) (78). The
2015 St Gallen Consensus (80,81) proposed that
a laboratory’s median Ki-67 value serve as the cut-
off value for high versus low proliferation in breast
cancers; this value usually coincides with the previ-
ously suggested cutoff value of 14%. The methods
of Ki-67 evaluation in the pathology laboratory
are not as standardized as they are for ER, PR,
and HER2. Immunohistochemical staining is
performed in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded

tissue; the most commonly used antibody is the
MIB-1 clone (82). It is reported only as a percent-
age of positive nuclei, with care to evaluate nuclear
positivity only in tumor cells. This analysis can be
done visually or with a digital analysis algorithm as
for ER and PR.

Tumor Biologic Considerations

Molecular Subtype
There are currently four defined breast cancer
subtypes based on hormone receptor status and

1914  November-December 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Figure  11.  Screenshot  shows  Aperio  Image  Analysis  (Aperio  Tech-
nologies, Vista, Calif) for HER2 with the use of the breast membranous
algorithm (HER2 membranous stain; original magnification, 310). Tu-
mor areas are highlighted, and the software determines the number
of cells that express HER2 and the intensity of that expression. Here,
an  overall  HER2  score  of  2  (borderline)  was  generated,  and  in  situ
hybridization was warranted. A HER2 score of 3+ shows strong and
circumferential staining in more than 10% of tumor cells, a score of 2+
shows either strong and circumferential staining in 10% of tumor cells
or fewer or moderate and/or not completely circumferential staining
in more than 10% of cells, a score of 1+ shows incomplete staining in
more than 10% of cells, and 0 is faint or incomplete staining in 10%
of tumor cells or fewer or no staining at all.

Figure 12.  Dual-color fluorescence in situ hybridization images show detection of HER2, with red signal in-
tensity representing HER2 and green signal intensity representing CEP17. A HER2 gene copy number greater
than or equal to 6.0 and/or a HER2/CEP17 ratio of greater than or equal to 2.0 are considered positive for HER2
overexpression, while a gene copy number less than 4.0 and/or a HER2/CEP17 ratio of less than 2.0 are generally
considered to be negative results. Images show amplified or positive HER2 with a HER2/CEP17 ratio of 5 (a) and
nonamplified or negative HER2 with a HER2/CEP17 ratio of 1 (b).

gene expression patterns: luminal A, luminal B,
HER2-enriched, and triple-negative (Fig 13) (83).

Luminal Subtype
The luminal epithelial cells that line the milk
ducts express low–molecular weight cytokeratins
(such as CK8 and CK18) and genes associated
with activation of estrogen receptors; therefore,
the luminal subtype overlaps with ER-positive
cancers and makes up the most common sub-
type (approximately 75%–80%) (78,83). These
are further divided into luminal A and luminal B

tumors. Luminal A tumors are the most com-
mon among the luminal types and have the best
prognosis (84). These are characterized by high
expression of ER-related genes and low expres-
sion of HER2 and proliferation-related genes
(eg, Ki-67) (83,84). Luminal B tumors are less
common and have a slightly worse prognosis
than do luminal A tumors. These are character-
ized by lower expression of ER-related genes,
variable expression of HER2 gene clusters, and
higher expression of proliferation-related genes
(83,84). Luminal B tumors are further stratified

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 7

Tirada et al  1915

Figure 13.  Flow chart shows molecular breast cancer subtypes based on hormone receptor status, proliferative markers, associated
histologic nuclear grades, and their clinical implications. EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor, Neg = negative, Pos = positive.

into two groups on the basis of HER2 expres-
sion, highlighting the importance of using the
combination of Ki-67 expression with hormone
receptor status and HER2 expression in clinical
subtyping (85,86). When assessed with On-
cotype DX (Genomic Health, Redwood City,
Calif) or MammaPrint (Agendia, Amsterdam,
the Netherlands), luminal B tumors have higher
recurrence scores and higher clinical risk.

hER2-enriched Tumors
The HER2-enriched tumor subtype accounts
for approximately 5%–10% of breast cancers
(85,87). It is characterized by high expression of
HER2 and low expression of ER and PR (83).
This is not synonymous with clinically HER2-
positive breast cancers, which may be tumors of a
luminal type (which have higher expression of ER
when compared with a HER2-enriched tumor).
This subtype has a worse prognosis than the lu-
minal types, although treatment directed against
HER2 in addition to the standard chemotherapy
regimen has shown substantial additional survival
benefits in this group (88).

Triple-negative Tumors
ER-negative, PR-negative, and HER2-negative
tumors, collectively called triple-negative tumors,
account for approximately 15%–20% of breast
cancers. They have the worst prognosis among
all subtypes, with higher proliferation rates, and
are predominantly high-grade tumors (89,90).

They are divided into two subtypes, the basal and
nonbasal tumors.

The basal subtype, as its name implies, has
a gene expression profile similar to that of the
basal epithelial cells of normal breast tissue and
expresses several basal markers, the most widely
accepted of which are high-molecular-weight
cytokeratins (such as CK5 and CK6) and epi-
dermal growth factor receptor (85). The nonbasal
subtype represents 7%–14% of breast cancers
(85,87) and includes interferon-rich, claudin-low,
and metaplastic subtypes.

The interferon-rich subtype is characterized

by overexpression of immune response genes,
offers a comparable prognosis to that of luminal
B tumors, and has the best prognosis among
triple-negative breast cancers (85). Claudin-low
tumors and metaplastic breast cancer tumors
are characterized by epithelial to mesenchymal
transition cancer stem cell–like features with
higher frequency of metaplastic and medullary
differentiation (85,89). Claudin-low tumors are
distinguished from metaplastic breast cancer tu-
mors by their low gene expression of tight junc-
tion claudin proteins. Metaplastic breast cancer
accounts for 1% of breast cancers and carries
mutations such as PIK3CA, AKT, or KRAS,
which also differentiate it from claudin-low
tumors (85). Metaplastic breast cancer tumors
have a poor prognosis similar to that of claudin-
low tumors and have higher local recurrence
and metastatic rates (91).

1916  November-December 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

In a study by Grimm et al (69), use of preop-
erative MRI allowed detection of multifocal and/
or multicentric disease and nodal involvement
more times in the higher-risk subtypes includ-
ing luminal B and HER2-enriched cancers. An
ongoing clinical trial (Alliance A011104/ACRIN
6694) (92) has the aim of comparing the role of
MRI in rates of recurrence in women with triple-
negative or HER2-enriched breast cancer.

Gene Expression Profiles
With the advent of the human genome project, a
multitude of genes involved in cell proliferation,
cell differentiation, and cell death, particularly in
breast tumors, were identified and categorized.
These breast cancer genes were measured and
profiled to determine the correlation between
gene expression and the risk of cancer recur-
rence. In the continued search for personalized
therapy, several multigene genomic assays were
developed and validated in clinical trials to guide
decision making regarding appropriate treatment
with adjuvant chemotherapy and/or endocrine
therapy, or in the case of DCIS, treatment with
radiation therapy in patients with early stage
breast cancer.

Adjuvant systemic therapy is responsible for
much of the reduction in mortality from breast
cancer (93). However, not every early-stage
breast cancer may benefit from adjuvant chemo-
therapy. This is where genomic assays become
practical tools in decision making. Two well-
known trials are the Trial Assigning Individual-
ized Options for Treatment (Rx) (TAILORx), a
trial to validate the use of Oncotype DX that was
performed in the United States, and the ongo-
ing Microarray in Node-Negative Disease May
Avoid Chemotherapy (MINDACT) trial, which
is a prospective trial in Europe to validate Mam-
maPrint (94,95).

Recently, the American Society of Clinical
Oncology (ASCO) updated their clinical prac-
tice guidelines for women with node-negative
ER-positive early-stage invasive breast cancer to
include the use of biomarker tests including On-
cotype DX, MammaPrint, Endopredict (Myriad
Genetics, Zurich, Switzerland), and Prosigna
PAM50 risk of recurrence score (nanoString,
Seattle, Wash) to help predict whether patients
will benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy (95).
Currently, only MammaPrint is endorsed by
ASCO for use in breast cancers with 0–3 posi-
tive nodes (Tables 1, 2) and only Oncotype DX
is included in the updated NCCN guidelines
to classify pathologic prognostic staging (Level
1 evidence). It is important to note that none
of these biomarker tests are validated for use in
HER2-positive or triple-negative breast cancers.

Oncotype DX and Oncotype DX DCIS
are 21-gene prognostic markers developed to
quantify the risk of distant breast cancer recur-
rence. This test allows analysis of tumor cells
and quantification of expression of any of the 21
selected genes. The test was validated in patients
with early-stage ER-positive HER2-negative
node-negative breast cancer (96) with 0–3 posi-
tive nodes (97), and recently, in DCIS (98).
The results for invasive cancers are reported by
using a numerical recurrence score with a scale
of 1–100 to categorize tumors as having a low
risk (recurrence score < 11), intermediate risk
(recurrence score of 11–25), and high risk (re-
currence score > 25) of recurrence. In the case
of DCIS, the numbers differ for low risk (recur-
rence score < 39), intermediate risk (recurrence
score 39–54), and high risk (recurrence score >
54) tumors. The test allows patients with inva-
sive cancers who would benefit from adjuvant
chemotherapy in addition to tamoxifen to be
identified (94) and those with DCIS who would
benefit from adjuvant radiation therapy to be
identified. For example, a patient with stage 1
hormone receptor–positive node-negative breast
cancer and a recurrence score of 30 likely would
benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy.

MammaPrint is a 70-gene expression profile
dichotomous risk classifier. Researchers chose the
top 70 genes from a list of 231 genes implicated
in distant metastasis within 5 years (99). A patient
with hormone receptor–positive HER2-negative
node-negative breast cancer is categorized as being
at low or high clinical risk of developing distant
metastasis within 5 years with the use of an online
risk assessment tool such as Adjuvant!Online
(www.adjuvantonline.com). The MammaPrint
assay can be used in patients at high clinical risk
to guide decision making regarding adjuvant
treatment (strong recommendation according to
ASCO guidelines [95]). If the same patient has
1–3 positive lymph nodes and high clinical risk,
the strength of the recommendation according
to ASCO is only moderate. MammaPrint allows
accurate discrimination of low and high risk of
recurrence in early-stage node-negative breast
cancer (100) and provides binary results, unlike
Oncotype DX. This test is not to be used in pa-
tients at low clinical risk according to results of the
Adjuvant!Online tool (101,102).

Endopredict is a gene expression profile that

includes eight breast cancer genes and three
reference genes used in hormone receptor–posi-
tive HER2-negative node-negative endocrine-
treated breast cancers to estimate residual risk
of early (0–5 years) and late (5–10 years) distant
recurrence and is reported with a score on a scale
of 0–15 (a score of ≤5 corresponds to low risk,

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 7

Tirada et al  1917

Table 1: Multigene Prognostic Genomic Assays to Evaluate Risk of Recurrence Treatment in Early
Breast Cancers

Variable

Oncotype DX* and
Oncotype DX DCIS  Mammaprint†

EndoPredict and
Epclin Score*

Patient eligibility

DCIS or stage I, II,

criteria

or IIIa

Stage I or II
ER and/or PR posi-

Stage I or II
ER and/or PR posi-

ER and/or PR positive
HER2 negative
Node negative or ≤
three lymph nodes

tive

tive

HER2 negative
Node negative or
≤ three lymph
nodes

HER2 negative
Node negative or
≤ three lymph
nodes

Risk evaluation

Risk of DCIS and/or

Risk of recurrence

Risk of distant

new invasive cancer
in the same breast
within 10 years
after surgery

of invasive cancer
within 10 years
after surgery

recurrence within
10 years after
surgery and hor-
monal therapy

Prosigna/PAM50*

Stage I–III
ER and/or PR positive
HER2 negative
Node negative or ≤ three

lymph nodes

Risk of distant recurrence
of node-negative or
node-positive cancer in
postmenopausal women
within 10 years after
surgery and after 5 years
of hormonal therapy

Treatment decision
according to risk

  Patients at high

  risk

Benefit from adjuvant
chemotherapy and/
or endocrine thera-
py after surgery

Benefit from addi-
tion of adjuvant
chemotherapy

Benefit from addi-
tion of adjuvant
chemotherapy

Benefit from addition of
adjuvant chemotherapy

  Patients at low

. . .

  risk

Endocrine therapy
alone is adequate

Endocrine therapy
alone is adequate

  Patients with

Additional benefit

. . .

. . .

Endocrine therapy alone

is adequate

. . .

  DCIS

from radiation ther-
apy after surgery

Tissue harvesting
at surgery or
core biopsy

No. of genes
analyzed

Formalin-fixed

Fresh frozen or

Fresh frozen or

Formalin-fixed paraffin-

paraffin-embedded
tissue

21

formalin-fixed
paraffin-embed-
ded tissue

70

formalin-fixed
paraffin-embed-
ded tissue
11‡

embedded tissue

58

*American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) guidelines and NCCN guidelines currently endorse use in ER
positive, early stage, node-negative cancers only.
†Patient must be categorized as at high clinical risk per MINDACT categorization (Adjuvant!Online).
‡Includes eight breast cancer genes and three reference genes.

indicating a less than 10% probability of distant
recurrence) (103). Epclin incorporates nodal sta-
tus and tumor size into the EndoPredict score to
provide more prognostic information (104,105).
The Prosigna PAM50 risk of recurrence
score, BCI (Breast Cancer Index, bioTheranos-
tics, https://www.breastcancerindex.com), or uPA
(urokinase plasminogen activator) and PAI-1U
(plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1) are other
genomic assays available that are also recom-
mended for hormone receptor–positive HER2-
negative node-positive or node-negative breast
cancers to guide decision making for adjuvant
chemotherapy. The strength of the recommenda-
tions varies according to the test.

Conclusion

In the era of personalized health care, besides
TNM cancer staging, several tools are available
to estimate a patient’s prognosis after diagnosis
of breast cancer on the basis of tissue mark-
ers, tumor biologic features, and gene profile.
The AJCC guidelines highlight the importance
of prognostic staging. As members of multi-
disciplinary teams, radiologists must become
acquainted with the breast cancer subtypes and
their prognostic and therapeutic implications.

Disclosures  of  Conflicts  of  Interest.—N.T. Activities  related  to
the present article: disclosed no relevant relationships. Activities
not related to the present article: expert testimony for Expert Vi-
sion. Other activities: disclosed no relevant relationships.

1918  November-December 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

Table 2: Scoring for Multigene Prognostic Genomic Assays

Scoring Variables

Oncotype DX and
Oncotype DX DCIS  Mammaprint

Invasive cancer ROR  ROR
0–100
<18

Scoring variable 1
  Scoring scale
  Low ROR
  Intermediate ROR 18–30
  High ROR
Scoring variable 2
  Scoring scale
  Low ROR
  Intermediate ROR 39–54
  High ROR

>54

>30
DCIS ROR
0–100
<39

Low or high
<100*
. . .
>29*
NA
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .

EndoPredict

Prosigna/PAM50 ROR

EndoPredict score Node-negative cancer ROR
0–100
0–15
0–40 (<10)†
0–5 (<10)†
41–60 (10–20)†
. . .
61–100 (>20)†
>5 (≥10)†
EPclin score‡
Node-positive cancer ROR
0–100
1.1–6.2
≤3.3 (<9)†
0–40
. . .
. . .
41–100
>3.3 (≥9)

Note.—NA = not applicable, ROR = risk of recurrence.
*Data are percentages.
†Data in parentheses are percentages.
‡The EPclin score is derived from a combination of the EndoPredict score, the tumor size, and the nodal status.

References
  1.  Noone AM, Howlader N, Krapcho M, et al, eds. SEER
Cancer  Statistics  Review,  1975-2015.  National  Can-
cer  Institute.  Bethesda,  MD.  https://seer.cancer.gov
/csr/1975_2015/.  Published  April  2018.  Accessed  Sep-
tember 18, 2018.

  2.  American Cancer Society. Cancer facts and figures 2017.

Atlanta, Ga: American Cancer Society, 2017.

  3.  Bundred  NJ.  Prognostic  and  predictive  factors  in  breast

cancer. Cancer Treat Rev 2001;27(3):137–142.

  4.  Cianfrocca  M,  Goldstein  LJ.  Prognostic  and  predictive
factors in early-stage breast cancer. Oncologist 2004;9(6):
606–616.

  5.  Clark GM. Do we really need prognostic factors for breast
cancer? Breast Cancer Res Treat 1994;30(2):117–126.
  6.  Amin MB, Edge S, Greene F, et al, eds. AJCC cancer stag-
ing manual. 8th ed. New York, NY: Springer, 2017.
  7.  Fredholm H, Eaker S, Frisell J, Holmberg L, Fredriksson
I, Lindman H. Breast cancer in young women: poor sur-
vival despite intensive treatment. PLoS One 2009;4(11):
e7695.

  8.  Anders CK, Hsu DS, Broadwater G, et al. Young age at
diagnosis correlates with worse prognosis and defines a subset
of breast cancers with shared patterns of gene expression.
J Clin Oncol 2008;26(20):3324–3330.

  9.  Eaker S, Dickman PW, Bergkvist L, Holmberg L; Uppsala/
Orebro Breast Cancer Group. Differences in management of
older women influence breast cancer survival: results from
a population-based database in Sweden. PLoS Med 2006;
3(3):e25.

10.  Aebi S, Gelber S, Castiglione-Gertsch M, et al. Is chemo-
therapy alone adequate for young women with oestrogen-
receptor-positive  breast  cancer?  Lancet  2000;355(9218):
1869–1874.

11.  Partridge AH, Gelber S, Piccart-Gebhart MJ, et al. Effect
of age on breast cancer outcomes in women with human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2-positive breast cancer:
results from a herceptin adjuvant trial. J Clin Oncol 2013;31
(21):2692–2698.

12.  Carey LA, Perou CM, Livasy CA, et al. Race, breast cancer
subtypes, and survival in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study.
JAMA 2006;295(21):2492–2502.

13.  Millikan RC, Newman B, Tse CK, et al. Epidemiology of
basal-like breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2008;109
(1):123–139.

14.  Passarelli MN, Newcomb PA, Hampton JM, et al. Cigarette
smoking before and after breast cancer diagnosis: mortality
from  breast  cancer  and  smoking-related  diseases.  J  Clin
Oncol 2016;34(12):1315–1322.

15.  Majed B, Moreau T, Senouci K, Salmon RJ, Fourquet A,
Asselain B. Is obesity an independent prognosis factor in
woman breast cancer? Breast Cancer Res Treat 2008;111(2):
329–342.

16.  Protani  M,  Coory  M,  Martin  JH.  Effect  of  obesity  on
survival of women with breast cancer: systematic review
and meta-analysis. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2010;123(3):
627–635.

17.  Ewertz M, Jensen MB, Gunnarsdóttir KÁ, et al. Effect of
obesity on prognosis after early-stage breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol 2011;29(1):25–31.

18.  Feig  SA.  Screening  mammography  benefit  contro-
versies:  sorting  the  evidence.  Radiol  Clin  North  Am
2014;52(3):455–480.

19.  Feig  SA.  Digital  breast  tomosynthesis:  the  road  ahead.

RadioGraphics 2014;34(4):E103–E105.

20.   Wishart GC, Greenberg DC, Britton PD, et al. Screen-de-
tected vs symptomatic breast cancer: is improved survival due
to stage migration alone? Br J Cancer 2008;98(11):1741–1744.
21.  Shen Y, Yang Y, Inoue LY, Munsell MF, Miller AB, Berry
DA. Role of detection method in predicting breast cancer
survival:  analysis  of  randomized  screening  trials.  J  Natl
Cancer Inst 2005;97(16):1195–1203.

22.  Joensuu H, Lehtimäki T, Holli K, et al. Risk for distant
recurrence  of  breast  cancer  detected  by  mammography
screening or other methods. JAMA 2004;292(9):1064–1073.
23.  Ballard LJ, Ballard GR. High-grade ductal carcinoma in
situ: an overview for the radiologist. J Am Osteopath Coll
Radiol 2013;2(1):18–25.

24.  Kalager M, Tamimi RM, Bretthauer M, Adami HO. Prog-
nosis in women with interval breast cancer: population based
observational cohort study. BMJ 2012;345:e7536.

25.  Narod SA, Iqbal J, Giannakeas V, Sopik V, Sun P. Breast
cancer mortality after a diagnosis of ductal carcinoma in
situ. JAMA Oncol 2015;1(7):888–896.

26.  Gierach GL, Ichikawa L, Kerlikowske K, et al. Relationship
between mammographic density and breast cancer death in
the Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium. J Natl Cancer
Inst 2012;104(16):1218–1227.

27.  Boyd NF, Guo H, Martin LJ, et al. Mammographic density
and the risk and detection of breast cancer. N Engl J Med
2007;356(3):227–236.

28.  Roubidoux MA, Bailey JE, Wray LA, Helvie MA. Invasive
cancers  detected  after  breast  cancer  screening  yielded  a
negative result: relationship of mammographic density to
tumor prognostic factors. Radiology 2004;230(1):42–48.

29.  Aiello  EJ,  Buist  DS,  White  E,  Porter  PL.  Association
between mammographic breast density and breast cancer
tumor characteristics. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
2005;14(3):662–668.

RG  •  Volume 38  Number 7

Tirada et al  1919

30.  Sala E, Solomon L, Warren R, et al. Size, node status and
grade of breast tumours: association with mammographic
parenchymal patterns. Eur Radiol 2000;10(1):157–161.
31.  Chiu SY, Duffy S, Yen AM, Tabár L, Smith RA, Chen HH.
Effect of baseline breast density on breast cancer incidence,
stage, mortality, and screening parameters: 25-year follow-up
of a Swedish mammographic screening. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 2010;19(5):1219–1228.

32.  Olsen AH, Bihrmann K, Jensen MB, Vejborg I, Lynge E.
Breast density and outcome of mammography screening:
a cohort study. Br J Cancer 2009;100(7):1205–1208.
33.  Carter CL, Allen C, Henson DE. Relation of tumor size,
lymph  node  status,  and  survival  in  24,740  breast  cancer
cases. Cancer 1989;63(1):181–187.

34.  Michaelson  JS,  Silverstein  M,  Sgroi  D,  et  al.  The  effect
of tumor size and lymph node status on breast carcinoma
lethality. Cancer 2003;98(10):2133–2143.

35.  Ustaalioglu BO, Bilici A, Kefeli U, et al. The importance of
multifocal/multicentric tumor on the disease-free survival of
breast cancer patients: single center experience. Am J Clin
Oncol 2012;35(6):580–586.

36.  Lynch SP, Lei X, Chavez-MacGregor M, et al. Multifocality
and multicentricity in breast cancer and survival outcomes.
Ann Oncol 2012;23(12):3063–3069.

37.  Weissenbacher TM, Zschage M, Janni W, et al. Multicentric
and multifocal versus unifocal breast cancer: is the tumor-
node-metastasis classification justified? Breast Cancer Res
Treat 2010;122(1):27–34.

38.  Ishida  T,  Furuta  A,  Moriya  T,  Ohuchi  N.  Pathological
assessment of intraductal spread of carcinoma in relation
to surgical margin state in breast-conserving surgery. Jpn J
Clin Oncol 2003;33(4):161–166.

39.  Healey EA, Osteen RT, Schnitt SJ, et al. Can the clinical
and mammographic findings at presentation predict the
presence of an extensive intraductal component in early
stage breast cancer? Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17
(6):1217–1221.

40.  Holland R, Connolly JL, Gelman R, et al. The presence
of an extensive intraductal component following a limited
excision correlates with prominent residual disease in
the  remainder  of  the  breast.  J  Clin  Oncol  1990;8(1):
113–118.

41.  Güth U, Wight E, Schötzau A, et al. A new approach in
breast cancer with non-inflammatory skin involvement. Acta
Oncol 2006;45(5):576–583.

42.  Silverman D, Ruth K, Sigurdson ER, et al. Skin involve-
ment and breast cancer: are T4b lesions of all sizes created
equal? J Am Coll Surg 2014;219(3):534–544.

43.  Carlson RW, Favret AM. Multidisciplinary management of
locally advanced breast cancer. Breast J 1999;5(5):303–307.
44.  Wieland AW, Louwman MW, Voogd AC, van Beek MW,
Vreugdenhil G, Roumen RM. Determinants of prognosis
in breast cancer patients with tumor involvement of the skin
(pT4b). Breast J 2004;10(2):123–128.

45.  Perez CA, Fields JN, Fracasso PM, et al. Management of
locally advanced carcinoma of the breast: II. Inflammatory
carcinoma. Cancer 1994;74(1 suppl):466–476.

46.  Liauw SL, Benda RK, Morris CG, Mendenhall NP. In-
flammatory breast carcinoma: outcomes with trimodality
therapy for nonmetastatic disease. Cancer 2004;100(5):
920–928.

47.  Baldini E, Gardin G, Evagelista G, Prochilo T, Collecchi
P,  Lionetto  R.  Long-term  results  of  combined-modality
therapy  for  inflammatory  breast  carcinoma.  Clin  Breast
Cancer 2004;5(5):358–363.

48.  Harris EE, Schultz D, Bertsch H, Fox K, Glick J, Solin LJ.
Ten-year  outcome  after  combined  modality  therapy  for
inflammatory breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2003;55(5):1200–1208.

49.  Palangie T, Mosseri V, Mihura J, et al. Prognostic factors
in inflammatory breast cancer and therapeutic implications.
Eur J Cancer 1994;30A(7):921–927.

50.  Liu J, Chen K, Jiang W, et al. Chemotherapy response and
survival of inflammatory breast cancer by hormone recep-
tor- and HER2-defined molecular subtypes approximation:
an analysis from the National Cancer Database. J Cancer
Res Clin Oncol 2017;143(1):161–168.

51.  Somlo G, Frankel P, Chow W, et al. Prognostic indicators
and survival in patients with stage IIIB inflammatory breast
carcinoma after dose-intense chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol
2004;22(10):1839–1848.

52.  Bristol IJ, Woodward WA, Strom EA, et al. Locoregional
treatment  outcomes  after  multimodality  management  of
inflammatory breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
2008;72(2):474–484.

53.  Lakhani SR, Ellis IO, Schnitt SJ, Tan PH, van de Vijver
MJ. WHO classification of tumours of the breast. 4th ed.
Lyon, France: IARC, 2012.

54.  Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2017. CA

Cancer J Clin 2017;67(1):7–30.

55.  Houvenaeghel G, Sabatier R, Reyal F, et al. Axillary lymph
node micrometastases decrease triple-negative early breast
cancer survival. Br J Cancer 2016;115(9):1024–1031.
56.  Andersson Y, Frisell J, Sylvan M, de Boniface J, Bergkvist
L.  Breast  cancer  survival  in  relation  to  the  metastatic
tumor  burden  in  axillary  lymph  nodes.  J  Clin  Oncol
2010;28(17):2868–2873.

57.  Cahoon AR, Smith BD, Yang WT. Internal thoracic lymph-
adenopathy in breast cancer. RadioGraphics 2017;37(4):
1024–1036.

58.  Shen  J,  Hunt  KK,  Mirza  NQ,  et  al.  Intramammary
lymph  node  metastases  are  an  independent  predictor  of
poor outcome in patients with breast carcinoma. Cancer
2004;101(6):1330–1337.

59.  Krag DN, Anderson SJ, Julian TB, et al. Sentinel-lymph-
node resection compared with conventional axillary-lymph-
node dissection in clinically node-negative patients with
breast cancer: overall survival findings from the NSABP
B-32 randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol 2010;11(10):
927–933.

60.  Giuliano AE, Hawes D, Ballman KV, et al. Association of
occult metastases in sentinel lymph nodes and bone marrow
with survival among women with early-stage invasive breast
cancer. JAMA 2011;306(4):385–393.

61.  Cheon H, Kim HJ, Lee SM, et al. Preoperative MRI features
associated with lymphovascular invasion in node-negative
invasive  breast  cancer:  a  propensity-matched  analysis.  J
Magn Reson Imaging 2017;46(4):1037–1044.

62.  Mori N, Mugikura S, Takasawa C, et al. Peritumoral appar-
ent diffusion coefficients for prediction of lymphovascular
invasion in clinically node-negative invasive breast cancer.
Eur  Radiol  2016;26(2):331–339.  [Published  correction
appears in Eur Radiol 2016;26(2):340–341.]

63.  Fisher ER, Gregorio RM, Fisher B, Redmond C, Vellios
F, Sommers SC. The pathology of invasive breast cancer:
a syllabus derived from findings of the National Surgical
Adjuvant Breast Project (protocol no. 4). Cancer 1975;36
(1):1–85.

64.  Holmes P, Lloyd J, Chervoneva I, et al. Prognostic markers
and long-term outcomes in ductal carcinoma in situ of the
breast treated with excision alone. Cancer 2011;117(16):
3650–3657.

65.  Maiorano E, Regan MM, Viale G, et al. Prognostic and
predictive impact of central necrosis and fibrosis in early
breast cancer: results from two International Breast Cancer
Study Group randomized trials of chemoendocrine adjuvant
therapy. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2010;121(1):211–218.

66.  Pestalozzi BC, Zahrieh D, Mallon E, et al. Distinct clinical
and prognostic features of infiltrating lobular carcinoma of
the breast: combined results of 15 International Breast Can-
cer Study Group clinical trials. J Clin Oncol 2008;26(18):
3006–3014.

67.  American College of Radiology Appropriateness Criteria.
Clinical condition: stage I breast cancer: initial workup and
surveillance for local recurrence and distant metastases in
asymptomatic women. https://acsearch.acr.org/docs/69496/
Narrative/. Last review date 2016. Accessed May 1, 2018.
68.  National Comprehensive Cancer Network Imaging Ap-
propriate  Use  Criteria.  Breast  cancer  v.1.2018.  https://
www.nccn.org/professionals/imaging/content/.  Accessed
May 1, 2018.

69.  Grimm LJ, Johnson KS, Marcom PK, Baker JA, Soo MS. Can
breast cancer molecular subtype help to select patients for
preoperative MR imaging? Radiology 2015;274(2):352–358.

1920  November-December 2018

radiographics.rsna.org

70.  Elston CW, Ellis IO. Pathological prognostic factors in breast
cancer: I. The value of histological grade in breast cancer:
experience  from  a  large  study  with  long-term  follow-up.
Histopathology 1991;19(5):403–410.

71.  Elston CW, Ellis IO, Pinder SE. Pathological prognostic
factors in breast cancer. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 1999;31(3):
209–223.

72.  Hoda SA, Brogi E, Koerner FC, Rosen PP. Rosen’s breast
pathology. 4th ed. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2014.

73.  Purdie CA, Quinlan P, Jordan LB, et al. Progesterone re-
ceptor expression is an independent prognostic variable in
early breast cancer: a population-based study. Br J Cancer
2014;110(3):565–572.

74.  Hammond ME, Hayes DF, Dowsett M, et al. American
Society of Clinical Oncology/College Of American Patholo-
gists guideline recommendations for immunohistochemical
testing  of  estrogen  and  progesterone  receptors  in  breast
cancer. J Clin Oncol 2010;28(16):2784–2795.

75.  Piccart-Gebhart MJ, Procter M, Leyland-Jones B, et al.
Trastuzumab  after  adjuvant  chemotherapy  in  HER2-
positive  breast  cancer.  N  Engl  J  Med  2005;353(16):
1659–1672.

76.  Wolff AC, Hammond ME, Hicks DG, et al. Recommenda-
tions for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 testing
in breast cancer: American Society of Clinical Oncology/
College of American Pathologists clinical practice guideline
update. J Clin Oncol 2013;31(31):3997–4013.

77.  Arnould  L,  Roger  P,  Macgrogan  G,  et  al.  Accuracy  of
HER2 status determination on breast core-needle biopsies
(immunohistochemistry, FISH, CISH and SISH vs FISH).
Mod Pathol 2012;25(5):675–682.

78.  Soliman  NA,  Yussif  SM.  Ki-67  as  a  prognostic  marker
according to breast cancer molecular subtype. Cancer Biol
Med 2016;13(4):496–504.

79.  Robertson  S,  Stålhammar  G,  Darai-Ramqvist  E,  et  al.
Prognostic  value  of  Ki67  analysed  by  cytology  or  histol-
ogy  in  primary  breast  cancer.  J  Clin  Pathol  2018jclin-
path-2017-204976.

80.  Goldhirsch  A,  Wood  WC,  Coates  AS,  et  al.  Strategies
for subtypes—dealing with the diversity of breast cancer:
highlights of the St. Gallen International Expert Consensus
on the Primary Therapy of Early Breast Cancer 2011. Ann
Oncol 2011;22(8):1736–1747.

81.  Coates  AS,  Winer  EP,  Goldhirsch  A,  et  al.  Tailoring
therapies—improving  the  management  of  early  breast
cancer: St Gallen International Expert Consensus on the
Primary Therapy of Early Breast Cancer 2015. Ann Oncol
2015;26(8):1533–1546.

82.  Dowsett M, Nielsen TO, A’Hern R, et al. Assessment of Ki67
in breast cancer: recommendations from the International
Ki67 in Breast Cancer Working Group. J Natl Cancer Inst
2011;103(22):1656–1664.

83.  Perou  CM,  Sørlie  T,  Eisen  MB,  et  al.  Molecular  por-
traits of human breast tumours. Nature 2000;406(6797):
747–752.

84.  Trop I, LeBlanc SM, David J, et al. Molecular classification
of infiltrating breast cancer: toward personalized therapy.
RadioGraphics 2014;34(5):1178–1195.

85.  Dai  X,  Xiang  L,  Li  T,  Bai  Z.  Cancer  hallmarks,  bio-
markers  and  breast  cancer  molecular  subtypes.  J  Cancer
2016;7(10):1281–1294.

86.  Cheang MC, Chia SK, Voduc D, et al. Ki67 index, HER2
status,  and  prognosis  of  patients  with  luminal  B  breast
cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 2009;101(10):736–750.

87.  Engstrøm MJ, Opdahl S, Hagen AI, et al. Molecular subtypes,
histopathological grade and survival in a historic cohort of
breast cancer patients. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2013;140
(3):463–473.

88.  Romond E, Suman VJ, Jeong JH, et al. Abstract S5-5: Trastu-
zumab plus adjuvant chemotherapy for HER2-positive breast
cancer: final planned joint analysis of overall survival (OS)
from NSABP B-31 and NCCTG N9831 [abstr]. Cancer
Res 2012;72(24 suppl):S5-5.

89.  Prat A, Parker JS, Karginova O, et al. Phenotypic and mo-
lecular characterization of the claudin-low intrinsic subtype
of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res 2010;12(5):R68.
90.  Teschendorff AE, Miremadi A, Pinder SE, Ellis IO, Caldas
C. An immune response gene expression module identifies a
good prognosis subtype in estrogen receptor negative breast
cancer. Genome Biol 2007;8(8):R157.

91.  Gibson GR, Qian D, Ku JK, Lai LL. Metaplastic breast
cancer: clinical features and outcomes. Am Surg 2005;71(9):
725–730.

92.  Bedrosian I, Comstock C. Alliance for Clinical Trials in
Oncology American College of Radiology Imaging Network
(Alliance A011104/ACRIN 6694). NCI version date April
4, 2013.

93.  Berry DA, Cronin KA, Plevritis SK, et al. Effect of screen-
ing and adjuvant therapy on mortality from breast cancer.
N Engl J Med 2005;353(17):1784–1792.

94.  Sparano JA. TAILORx: trial assigning individualized options
for treatment (Rx). Clin Breast Cancer 2006;7(4):347–350.
95.  Krop I, Ismaila N, Andre F, et al. Use of biomarkers to
guide decisions on adjuvant systemic therapy for women
with early-stage invasive breast cancer: American Society
of Clinical Oncology Clinical Practice Guideline Focused
Update. J Clin Oncol 2017;35(24):2838–2847.

96.  Cronin M, Sangli C, Liu ML, et al. Analytical validation of
the Oncotype DX genomic diagnostic test for recurrence
prognosis  and  therapeutic  response  prediction  in  node-
negative,  estrogen  receptor-positive  breast  cancer.  Clin
Chem 2007;53(6):1084–1091.

97.  Dowsett M, Cuzick J, Wale C, et al. Prediction of risk of
distant  recurrence  using  the  21-gene  recurrence  score  in
node-negative and node-positive postmenopausal patients
with breast cancer treated with anastrozole or tamoxifen: a
TransATAC study. J Clin Oncol 2010;28(11):1829–1834.
98.   Rakovitch E, Nofech-Mozes S, Hanna W, et al. A population-
based validation study of the DCIS score predicting recurrence
risk in individuals treated by breast-conserving surgery alone.
Breast Cancer Res Treat 2015;152(2):389–398.

99.  van ’t Veer LJ, Dai H, van de Vijver MJ, et al. Gene expres-
sion  profiling  predicts  clinical  outcome  of  breast  cancer.
Nature 2002;415(6871):530–536.

100.  Cardoso F, Van’t Veer L, Rutgers E, Loi S, Mook S, Piccart-
Gebhart MJ. Clinical application of the 70-gene profile: the
MINDACT trial. J Clin Oncol 2008;26(5):729–735.
101.  Ravdin PM, Siminoff LA, Davis GJ, et al. Computer program
to  assist  in  making  decisions  about  adjuvant  therapy  for
women with early breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2001;19(4):
980–991.

102.  Early  Breast  Cancer  Trialists’  Collaborative  Group
(EBCTCG). Effects of chemotherapy and hormonal therapy
for early breast cancer on recurrence and 15-year survival: an
overview of the randomised trials. Lancet 2005;365(9472):
1687–1717.

103.  Filipits M, Rudas M, Jakesz R, et al. A new molecular pre-
dictor of distant recurrence in ER-positive, HER2-negative
breast  cancer  adds  independent  information  to  conven-
tional clinical risk factors. Clin Cancer Res 2011;17(18):
6012–6020.

104.  Dubsky P, Brase JC, Jakesz R, et al. The EndoPredict score
provides prognostic information on late distant metastases
in ER+/HER2- breast cancer patients. Br J Cancer 2013;
109(12):2959–2964.

105.  Buus R, Sestak I, Kronenwett R, et al. Comparison of En-
dopredict and Epclin with Oncotype DX recurrence score
for prediction of risk of distant recurrence after endocrine
therapy. J Natl Cancer Inst 2016;108(11):djw149.

This journal-based SA-CME activity has been approved for AMA PRA Category 1 CreditTM. See rsna.org/learning-center-rg.

